--- PAGE 2 ---
DECODING  
ECONOMIC CRISES

--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 4 ---
NEW JERSEY   •  LONDON   •  SINGAPORE   •  BEIJING   •  SHANGHAI   •  HONG KONG   •  TAIPEI   •  CHENNAI   •  TOKYO
DECODING  
ECONOMIC CRISES
Cristina Peicuti 
Jean-Marc Daniel
ESCP Business School, France

--- PAGE 5 ---
Published by
World Scientific Publishing Europe Ltd.
57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE
Head ofÏce: 5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA ofÏce:  27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Peicuti, Cristina, author. | Daniel, Jean-Marc, author.  
Title: Decoding economic crises / Cristina Peicuti, ESCP Business School, France, 
 Jean-Marc Daniel, ESCP Business School, France.  
Description: Hackensack, NJ : World Scientific, [2024] | 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2023039693 | ISBN 9781800615106 (hardcover) | 
 ISBN 9781800615113 (ebook for institutions) | ISBN 9781800615120 (ebook for individuals)  
Subjects: LCSH: Financial crises. | Crises. 
Classification: LCC HB3722 .P444 2024 | DDC 338.5/42--dc23/eng/20231005 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023039693
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
First published 2024 (Hardcover)
Reprinted 2024 (in paperback edition)
ISBN  9781800615700 (pbk)
Copyright © 2024 by Cristina Peicuti & Jean-Marc Daniel
All rights reserved. 
For any available supplementary material, please visit 
https://www.worldscientific.com/worldscibooks/10.1142/Q0446#t=suppl
Translated from the French by Malcolm Leveridge
Desk Editors: Logeshwaran Arumugam/Ana Ovey/Shi Ying Koe 
Typeset by Stallion Press
 
Email: enquiries@stallionpress.com
Printed in Singapore

--- PAGE 6 ---
“Who knows what the tide could bring?”
Tom Hanks in Cast Away

--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 8 ---
Translated with the support of  
BPCE Chair “Mutual and Cooperative Banking  
for the Benefit of the Economy” at the ESCP BS.

--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 10 ---
ix
About the Authors
Cristina Peicuti foresaw the 2008 crisis, which was the subject of her 
thesis, “The subprime mortgage crisis and the credit channel” (Paris, 
Panthéon-Assas University, 2006–2009). An affiliate professor and a sci -
entific director at the ESCP Business School (Paris), the oldest business 
school of France, she is an economist in a mutual and cooperative bank. 
In addition, she is the chair of the Strategy and Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee of the Realités Real Estate Group and serves as 
an adviser to the French government on foreign trade. She is a member of 
Société d’Économie Politique, one of France’s oldest learned societies, 
concerned with political economy. Cristina is the author of the books 
Credit, Destabilisation and Crises, Decoding Economic Crises (2024) and 
Of Banks and Crises (2024).
Jean-Marc Daniel is an emeritus associate professor at ESCP Business 
School. He serves as the president of the Société d’Économie Politique. 
He regularly offers his insights as a commentator on BFM Business and 
contributes as a columnist to Les Echos.

--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 12 ---
xi
Contents
About the Authors ix
Introduction xiii
Part I Can the Economy Exist Without Crises? 1
Chapter 1 There Have Been Crises Since the Dawn of Time  3
Chapter 2 Theoretical Analysis of Crises 11
Defining a crisis 11
Is a crisis a phase in the cycle?  17
1929 crisis: Keynes takes the stage  23
Formalisation of cycle post-1929: Hansen and  
Samuelson provide another conception  
of Keynes’s general theory 30
Real business cycle theory 36
Crises herald permanent transformations:  
Regulation theory 37
Chapter 3  Economic Cycle and Policy 41
Fiscal policy comes into play 41
Contesting fiscal policy 43
Money and finance 45
Foreign exchange policy in times of crisis  52

--- PAGE 13 ---
xii Decoding Economic Crises
Part II A History of Crises 55
Chapter 4  The Great Depression and Debt Deflation 57
The “Great Contraction” 59
Chapter 5  The 1975 Recession 65
The economic turning point 67
Western countries and oil 71
Chapter 6 1993 Crisis: OECD Employment Strategy 75
Cyclical downturn: Fiscal policy to the rescue  75
European specificity: EMS crisis 77
OECD draws lessons from the crisis  81
Chapter 7 2008 Crisis and Quantitative Easing 85
Pauperisation of Americans and subprime mortgages 85
The Great Recession 89
G20 asserts itself 91
The action of central banks 96
Would Irving Fisher have wanted central banks  
to go to such lengths in 2008 to avoid deflation?  100
Chapter 8  Exogenous Crises: Pandemics and Wars 105
Pandemics 105
Wars 110
Conclusion 117
Bibliography 123
Index 127

--- PAGE 14 ---
xiii
Introduction
 “The inherent vice of capitalism is the unequal sharing  
of blessings; the inherent virtue of socialism is the equal  
sharing of miseries.”
— Winston Churchill
Is the market economy stable by nature? What happens to make it unsta -
ble? Is it external shocks, such as pandemics or wars? Is it the incompe -
tence of policymakers or regulators? Or is this instability inherent to the 
market economy’s very dynamics and/or mechanisms? Does the market 
economy carry the forces and seeds of its destabilisation? If so, will this 
destabilisation prove fatal, as Marx and communist theoreticians believe? 
Is there an alternative to the market economy? Or do these upheavals 
merely require patience on the part of economic agents and policymakers, 
long enough for negative effects to be cushioned?
It is easy enough to criticise the market economy. Many thinkers have 
announced its demise, bemoaning or rejoicing at the prospect. However, 
since the mid-18th century, the Western world has experienced strong 
growth thanks to the market economy’s existence in more or less modified 
forms. Growth has not prevented economic fluctuations and crises to this 
day.
At the end of the Second World War, through the Marshall Plan, the 
United States helped the western half of Europe recover and continue to 
develop based on a market economy. The other half of Europe, “liberated” 

--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv Decoding Economic Crises
by the Soviet Union (only to be brought under its yoke), did not have the 
opportunity to benefit from the Marshall Plan.
The United States administration gathered the negotiators of 17 European 
countries and oversaw the implementation of the Marshall Plan from 1948 
to 1950 from the Hotel de Talleyrand, the Paris mansion located between 
rue Saint-Florentin and place de la Concorde, home of the great French 
statesman after whom it is named, where he entertained heads of state and 
international dignitaries and where he passed away.
Talleyrand pulled the strings at the Congress of Vi enna after 
Napoleon’s defeat and even during the Hundred Days, when he managed 
to convince the European victors not to leave the negotiating table, claim-
ing that Napoleon would not remain in power for long! After the Second 
World War, it was the United States that pulled the strings, fittingly from 
the Hotel de Talleyrand, which served as headquarters for the Marshall 
Plan.1
After 1945, the USSR imposed a classical Soviet-typ e command 
economy on one half of Europe. Populations in Eastern Europe (or strictly, 
Central Europe, a hotchpotch of cultures, languages  and economies), in 
opposition to Western Europe, were forced into a so -called communist 
economy, turning their backs on the market system.
By the time the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, the economic performances 
of former Soviet Bloc countries bore testimony to the aberrations of a 
planned economy. The communist era from 1948 to 1989 was a political, 
moral and economic tragedy for Eastern Europe. This tragedy is plain to 
see in the case of Czechoslovakia, a country with a rich industrial heritage 
and whose economic development before 1939 was comparable to that of 
1 At the time of the Marshall Plan, the Hotel de Talleyrand belonged to the Rothschild family. 
The United States acquired the mansion on 14 November 1950 to house its embassy and later 
the Marshall Center, home to a unique exhibit honouring the pivotal European contributions 
to the success of the European Recovery Program, better known as the Marshall Plan. More 
than 70 years later, the mansion is still home to the United States embassy. In the intervening 
years, the United States has ruled supreme, playing a central role in international diplomacy 
and the world economy. No matter the sheer scale of the Marshall Plan and communication 
efforts surrounding it or the United States leadership since then, the stately mansion remains 
named after the great French statesman, not the United States Secretary of State. Talleyrand’s 
wish, “I want people to continue discussing for centuries what I was, what I thought, what  
I wanted”, has thus been fulfilled, much to the chagrin of the United States, for George C. 
Marshall cannot lay claim to such as august a legacy.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Introduction xv
Western countries. In 1948, when the Communist Party assumed undis -
puted control over the government following a coup d’état , per capita 
income in the country was higher than in Western Germany and 85% of 
per capita income in France. By the time of the so-called Velvet Revolution 
in 1989, per capita income in Czechoslovakia was 60% of per  capita 
income in Germany and 62% of per capita income in France. After 1989, 
not one former “socialist country” continued to base its development on a 
command economy. All swung from one extreme to the other, from a 
command economy to a liberal economy.
One might say of the market economy what Winston Churchill said of 
democracy: “It has been said that democracy is the worst form of govern-
ment except for all those other forms that have been tried from time to 
time”.
The market economy that existed in Europe and the United States 
before the Second World War, which the latter imposed on the world in 
the post-war era, prevailed. Of course, historical circumstances mean that 
it has been fashioned on the lines desired by the United States. Post-war, 
this country has been the great artisan of globalisation.
Notwithstanding this success, large-scale crises reminiscent of the 
Crash of 1929 have rocked capitalist economies since 1945. The world 
economy experienced recessions (contractions in activity) in 1975, 1992–
1993, 2009 and 2020. Public authorities proved incapable of preventing 
the crises (1929, 1974, 1991 and 2008) that had preceded these recessions. 
That being so, they had to heal what they could not prevent. One question 
is whether globalisation and what some have called the “financialisation” 
of the economy contributed to the propagation of these tremors in increas-
ingly interlocked economies at the global level. These global crises have 
led to massive interventions by states — what might be called state inter -
ference — and central banks, which gradually affirmed their independ -
ence. The very fabric of the market economy has been distorted as a 
result. To function optimally and for economic agents to find meaning in 
their involvement, the market economy needs to remain labour- and 
competition-based. Instead, it is structured increasingly around the accu -
mulation of debt, particularly public debt.
Having proved incapable of preventing the onset of crises, the ques -
tion is whether governments and regulators have at least been able to 
contain these phenomena. In particular, have they drawn lessons from 
each crisis to better deal with the next one and mitigate toxic aftermaths? 
There was the debt deflation after the Great Depression, the stimulus 

--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi Decoding Economic Crises
plans in 1975 based on the locomotive theory developed by the OECD, 
Japan’s recourse to quantitative easing in 1992–1993 before the wider 
adoption of this monetary policy during the 2008 crisis and the Pandemic 
Emergency Purchase Programme in 2020. Were these cures or just band-
aid solutions? Were these responses rational or arbitrary? Ultimately, is 
capitalism such as we know it all about competition (and may the best 
win!)? Or is it a matter of connivance, with the state favouring one or 
other economic agent and kicking the problems down the road? Is the 
limitless recourse to debt underpinning the economic system an instance 
of what communist theoreticians call “state monopoly capitalism”?
Understanding the origins of crises, their evolution, their resolution 
and their necessity will, in turn, help comprehend today’s world. One can 
adapt instead of nervously blundering blindfolded through a crisis. One 
can grasp not just the risks but also the opportunities and thus take advan-
tage of a crisis.
Each crisis has its winners and losers. To identify the big winners and 
losers, one needs only to consider the breakdown of global wealth before 
and after the 2008 or 2019 crisis.
A subsidiary question is whether countries that have carried the day 
can hold on to their gains. Can anything be inferred about their capacity 
to lead the world economy? In the 19th century, Britain dominated the 
world economy, with its vision of the economy based on classical/neo -
classical liberal theories. Since 1945, it has been dominated by the United 
States, based on a Keynesian justification for the systematic use of budget 
deficits and easy money. American economic leadership was not funda -
mentally challenged by the Soviet countermodel and its avatars. Will the 
pounding inflicted by the 1992, 2009 and 2020 recessions deal a blow to 
this leadership to the benefit of the authoritarian capitalism that has flour-
ished in Asia? Or will environmental challenges usher in a more devastat-
ing crisis reminiscent of the “nutritional trap” theorised by Nobel Prize 
winner Angus Deaton? Will there be a return to times of absolute scarcity 
and famine prevalent before the mid-18th century?

--- PAGE 18 ---
Part I
Can the Economy Exist  
Without Crises?
“We cannot solve our problems  
with the same thinking we used  
when we created them.”
— Albert Einstein

--- PAGE 19 ---
This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 20 ---
3
Chapter 1 
There Have Been Crises Since the  
Dawn of Time
“There is nothing new under the sun”, Ecclesiastes 1:9. Crises are no 
exception. They are a perpetual repetition, to the point that they fit into 
another phenomenon: market economy cycles. This repetitiousness begs 
the question of what the economy would be like without crises. Would the 
economy even exist? Would it present a degree of sustainability?
Modern crises are often financial crises. They generally start with a 
rise in the price of an asset that is limited in nature to a level that is 
increasingly above that asset’s intrinsic value. The inflation in the price of 
the asset is fuelled by the fact that related purchases are often made on 
credit in the United States. During the crash of 1929 and again in 1992 
and 2008, the asset in question was real estate. The spectacular rise in 
prices encouraged more and more economic agents to buy real estate in 
the hope of reselling it later at a substantial profit. The rise in prices is out 
of all proportion. As the German proverb goes, trees don’t grow to the 
sky: the speculative bubble 1 ends up bursting, and the market goes into 
reverse. What follows is a sudden and dramatic plunge in the price of the 
asset, back towards its intrinsic value. It may even fall below this value 
because of an overabundant supply of this asset in the face of weak 
demand, with mistrust taking hold. As the American billionaire and 
1 The term “speculative bubble” dates back to the start of the 18th century. It was coined 
by the British authorities in reference to the speculation surrounding the stock of the South 
Sea Company and the subsequent collapse in the stock price, the episode becoming known 
as the South Sea Bubble.

--- PAGE 21 ---
4 Decoding Economic Crises
businessman Warren Buffett put it, “only when the tide goes out do you 
discover who’s been swimming naked”. What is important is that what 
starts off as a financial correction leads to a crisis: the frailty of the econ -
omy at macro- and microeconomic levels is laid bare for all to see (at the 
global and country levels, as well as at the level of businesses and house-
holds). In fact, it is when the purchase of assets at exorbitant prices has 
been financed on credit that the crisis really begins because selling the 
assets is no longer enough to repay the credit. As a result, banks are also 
undermined. They find themselves quite unable to continue financing the 
economy, even though it is already in difficulty. This was the scenario in 
the crises of 1929, 1992 and 2008.
Such speculative bubbles have existed since time immemorial. There 
were already instances in ancient Rome. In AD 33, during the reign of 
Emperor Tiberius, Rome’s financial system experienced a crisis, the first 
for which there are quite precise accounts of its unfolding. This was a 
credit crisis: creditors called in loans in order to purchase land (to meet a 
requirement under a lapsed but now revived decree that conditioned usury 
on part of the lender’s capital being invested in land), which led to a large 
number of defaults as debtors could not raise the funds. Such was the scale 
of the crisis that the Roman State stepped in, meeting the debtors’ obliga-
tions towards their creditors. Amounts owed by debtors now had to be 
repaid to the state. Also, the state injected liquidity into the system by 
channelling funds through specially chartered banks that offered three-
year, interest-free loans. In this way, creditors avoided bankruptcy as they 
recovered from the Treasury what they were owed. Debtors also avoided 
bankruptcy: their debt subsisted but was now sustainable. To the extent an 
estimate can even be drawn up, these measures cost the equivalent of 
0.5% of the Roman Empire’s gross domestic product.
The first speculative bubble to have captured the p ublic’s imagina-
tion for generations was probably the Tulip Bulb Market Bubble in  
the 17th century. It occurred in the United Provinc es (present-day 
Netherlands). The craze for tulip bulbs led to an i rrational rise in their 
price, which reached a peak in February 1637. A word — tulpenmanie in 
Dutch, or “tulipomania” — was even coined to describe the frenzied buy-
ing that gripped the country between 1633 and 1637.  During this period, 
the price of tulip bulbs increased fivefold between  12 and 25 November 
1636. Then, it doubled again between 25 November an d 3 February 
1637, the day on which prices began to fall. On 3 F ebruary, the price of 
a tulip bulb represented 10 times the annual salary  of a Dutch craftsman 

--- PAGE 22 ---
There Have Been Crises Since the Dawn of Time 5
in those days. By 1 May 1637, the price had returne d to its level of  
early November 1636. The first modern episode of ge neralised specula -
tion, tulipomania, continues to feed the theoretical reflections of financial 
specialists to this day. This founding act of what is known as “speculative 
hysteria” was followed by other speculative bubbles , mainly due to the 
evolution of the public debt.
When, to the king’s surprise, a speculative bubble burst at the start of 
the 18th century in France, the monarch asked V oltaire for an explanation, 
which he provided in one sentence: “paper money eventually returns to its 
intrinsic value, your Majesty”.2
Financial crises are a very old problem. They are often presented as 
the alpha and omega of the crises that have shaken the economy. Though 
financial crises have captured the imagination, before the Industrial 
Revolution, the most devastating crises for the population were subsist -
ence crises. The “nutritional trap” theorised by Angus Deaton refers back 
to this era. Extreme and general scarcity of food leads to dramatic rises in 
prices. The crisis, whether due to speculation or to an absolute scarcity 
linked to poor harvests, results in a sharp rise in the prices of certain com-
modities, leading to a considerable redistribution of income and plunging 
large swaths of the population into misery.
With the onset of the Industrial Revolution, the economic growth of 
industrialised countries was marked by crises that were not strictly finan -
cial, unlike those caused by food shortages. They started as “industrial” 
crises, characterised by a phase of overproduction, followed by a correc -
tion that resulted in a contraction of production. In the 19th century, the 
periodicity of these crises was, on average, decennial: 1816, 1825, 1836, 
1847, 1857, 1866, 1873, 1882, 1890, 1900, 1907 and 1913. As early as the 
1820s, this periodicity meant that the notion of crisis was fairly systemati-
cally associated with the idea of an economic cycle. One of the issues with 
which economic theory is still grappling to this day is the regularity of the 
slowdowns in growth, or, put another way, the relevance of the cycle con-
cept. Are these repeated slowdowns wholly fortuitous or attributable to 
the very functioning of the market economy? This question shows that an 
understanding of crises requires an analysis of economic cycles.
In 1926, in his book entitled The Major Economic Cycles , Soviet 
economist Nikolai Kondratiev [1892–1938] postulated that there are  
long economic cycles, lasting between 50 and 60 years, which comprise 
2 Orieux, Jean (1999). 

--- PAGE 23 ---
6 Decoding Economic Crises
three phases: expansion, lasting 20–25 years, followed by a short turning 
point, and then depression, also lasting 20–25 years. This theory had the 
favours of French economist and sociologist François Joseph Charles 
Simiand [1873–1935], who considered that during a phase A, there is a 
rise in prices accompanied by sustained growth in production, and then, 
during a phase B, there is a fall in prices, followed by slower economic 
growth. These two phases follow each other. However, other contempo -
rary economists, such as Wesley C. Mitchell, 3 considered them simply 
business cycles of varying duration. Paul Samuelson [1915–2009], the 
recipient of the 1970 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences, dismissed the 
Kondratieff cycle as “science fiction”.
After the First World War, econometrics was enlisted to try to quantify 
crises and cycles. The intention was to adopt as scientific an approach as 
possible in determining the relevance of the notion of cycle and identify -
ing its periodicity. This meant developing statistical methods using quan-
titative data to predict economic fluctuations, cycles and their regularity. 
One of the presuppositions of the econometric approach is admitting that 
such predictions do not provide a theoretical, rational justification of cycle 
mechanisms but a simple empirical description.
Economic research thus became a major issue for economists and one 
of the aspects of their work most visible in the public debate. The creation 
of the National Bureau of Economic Research in the United States in 
1920, the Institut fur Konjunkturforschung in Germany in 1925 and 
the Service d’Observation Économique in France in 1937 illustrate the 
development of this new branch of economic science. Academics were 
involved in this development. For example, in the 1920s, Harvard 
University developed a barometer of business conditions that was sup -
posed to forecast the evolution of the economy. As disappointing as the 
results of economic forecasts proved, as they were often invalidated, 
econometrics became a major branch of economic science. It is now sys -
tematically used by economists to the point of being indispensable. At the 
same time, more and more institutions, such as credit rating agencies, are 
combining big data and artificial intelligence to forecast economic fluc -
tuations and crises, thus increasing the reliability of mathematical models 
and econometric equations.
The Industrial Revolution shaped the 19th century, whereas in the 
20th century, services played a similar role. This change was accompanied 
3 Mitchell, Wesley C. (1913). 

--- PAGE 24 ---
There Have Been Crises Since the Dawn of Time 7
by the financialisation of the economy, which gave rise to a new form to 
crises. Before the 20th century, a financial crisis could occur without eco-
nomic agents noticing. Now, it propagates through the entire economy. 
Financial crises spread fast because global finance is a tightly interwoven 
system, as is global trade.
The crisis of 1929 began in the United States with the failure of the 
Bank of United States, a systemically important bank, whose defining char-
acteristic was that it was too big to fail without bringing about the collapse 
of the financial system. The bank’s grandiose name, suggesting it was an 
emanation of the state, meant that its failure reverberated around the world. 
In fact, this triggered what is considered to be the first major global crisis, 
reminiscent of contemporary crises. It was of excep tional magnitude and 
had devastating consequences, from which Europe has not yet fully recov-
ered. It should be remembered that the Nazi rise to power, which led to the 
Second World War, was mainly due to widespread economic misery.
Similarly, the 2008 crisis, which began with the failure of another 
American bank, Lehman Brothers, unleashed a wave of populist senti -
ment. As Talleyrand explained in his memoirs, “the ranks of the discon -
tented are made up of the thinking poor”. 4
There could have been a rescue of the two American banks. They 
were illiquid but not insolvent. In other words, despite having negative 
equity, these banks were not technically bankrupt. What they lacked were 
highly liquid assets to meet their immediate commitments. They were 
short of cash, a problem that a bridge loan could have solved. However, a 
bridge loan was not forthcoming from the United States regulator, which 
let them default and pushed them into bankruptcy. No one knows what 
would have happened if the government had arranged the loan to help 
them through this difficult period. In particular, wouldn’t the cycle have 
caught up with developed economies in any case? Be that as it may, the 
whole world, especially Europe, paid a high price for the consequences of 
what, in many ways, was an inconsequential decision by the United States 
regulator.
Nowadays, crises have the characteristic of being global. Also, para -
doxically, more damage is done to other countries than to the one where 
they originated. In other words, it is not the country triggering a global 
crisis that foots the bill. In the aftermath of a global crisis, there are no 
indemnities or reparations, as there might be after a war. The failings of 
4 Talleyrand-Périgord, Charles-Maurice (de). (2002). 

--- PAGE 25 ---
8 Decoding Economic Crises
American policymakers were responsible for the 1929 and 2008 crises 
taking on a devastating dimension, but other countries paid the price!
These failings — in a country that has produced the most Nobel prizes 
in economics — raise the question of why economics is not proving capa-
ble of providing policymakers with mistake-proofing tools. The word 
“crisis” is frequently used, not to say overused, in economic analysis. 
Whether the economic crisis is presented as global or sectoral, financial 
or affecting the real economy, the expression is nowadays pervasive to the 
point of suggesting that the phenomenon is permanent and has, therefore, 
become a normality, which is paradoxical.
Be that as it may, the mission of today’s economists is to provide a 
theoretical explanation of its causes and the ensuing chain of events, as 
well as the means to mitigate its effects and prevent repetitions. Have they 
been successful? This question does indeed have to be asked, as it was 
raised in no uncertain terms by no less than the Queen of England, 
Elizabeth II. In November 2008, during the reception staged on the occa -
sion of her visit to the prestigious London School of Economics (LSE), 
her Majesty asked her hosts:
“Why didn’t anyone see the financial crisis coming?”
Slightly taken aback, her entourage quickly came up with a rather pat 
answer, adding that more time would be needed to provide her Majesty 
with a structured answer intelligible to non-economists.
In early 2009, the LSE decided to pursue the matter and respond with 
a reasoned argumentation to what is undoubtedly a challenge to economic 
science. There is no question of dodging the problem by settling for a few 
truisms. It therefore launched a call for contributions to answer Her 
Gracious Majesty’s question without detour and, more broadly, to stem 
the tide of criticism directed at economists. Soon enough, the task of writ-
ing this reply was entrusted to three people. The first was Jim O’Neill, an 
English economist who was head of global economics research at 
Goldman Sachs. He gained notoriety with the publication of his seminal 
paper on the rise of emerging economies, in which he coined the acronym 
BRIC5 for Brazil, Russia, India and China. The second was Tim Besley,  
5 BRICs in Building Better Global Economic BRICs was later modified to BRICS follow-
ing the addition of South Africa. The BRICS concept has been widely adopted and gained 
institutional recognition, even though the five countries in question have enjoyed quite 
differing economic fortunes.

--- PAGE 26 ---
There Have Been Crises Since the Dawn of Time 9
a professor at the LSE who was a rising star in British economics. The 
third was Nicholas MacPherson, the then permanent secretary to the 
British Treasury. He was the bearer of what economists call the “Treasury 
Opinion”, the thoughts of senior British officials who were considered to 
be among the best economists in the world. Nicolas MacPherson studied 
at Oxford University’s Balliol College, a venerable institution if ever there 
was one, as it boasts Adam Smith himself among its former students. The 
trio met regularly, often joined by William Keegan, the economic editor 
of the Observer newspaper, who acted as reporter.
This response took the form of a letter sent to Buckingham Palace in 
July 2009. Tim Besley did most of the legwork and wrote the bulk of the 
text. However, his paper was also vetted by the leading British economists 
at the British Academy Forum held on 17 June 2009.
After getting acquainted with the text, Her Majesty authorised the 
Observer to print a résumé. For the authors, the crisis is the consequence 
of an overly lax monetary policy and a refusal to correct current account 
imbalances on the part of both countries running deficits (such as the 
United States) and those running surpluses (China, Germany, Japan and 
the oil-producing countries).
But what is most interesting is the conclusion in the penultimate 
paragraph:
“So in summary, Your Majesty, the failure to foresee the timing, extent 
and severity of the crisis and to head it off, while it had many causes, 
was principally a failure of the collective imagination of many bright 
people, both in this country and internationally, to understand the risks 
to the system as a whole”.
Officially, faced with what is a worrying admission of impotence 
likely to bring the very function of economist into disrepute, there was no 
reaction from the Queen. Will the letter have dispelled Her Majesty’s 
doubts? Probably not since these doubts were shared by an increasing 
number of people, including Paul Krugman. Shortly before the letter 
drafted by the LSE was delivered to Buckingham Palace, the influential 
British weekly The Economist  published an article on 16 July 2009 in 
which it reported that, in a recent lecture, the winner of the 2008 Nobel 
Prize in Economics argued that much of the past 30 years of macroeco-
nomics was “spectacularly useless at best, and positively harmful at 
worst”.

--- PAGE 27 ---
10 Decoding Economic Crises
Some three years later, while visiting the Bank of England in 
December 2012, the Queen indulged in some more or less ironic remarks, 
wondering if “people had got a bit [...] lax?” in the run-up to the 2009 
crisis. The Financial Services Authority responded immediately, making 
their mea culpa and giving assurances that thinking about sound and pru -
dent credit management had been, and remained, more than ever at the 
centre of their concerns.
Nevertheless, confessing to “a failure of the collective imagination” 
will not get economists off the hook forever. They must be aware of the 
need to respond in a practical, pragmatic way to the questions that have 
fuelled so much debate within the profession, as unanswered questions 
have an unsettling effect on all economic agents.
To better understand the explanations given to Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II, let’s first cast our minds back to the arguments of economists 
through the ages to then proceed to determine a theory of “crises”.

--- PAGE 28 ---
11
Chapter 2
Theoretical Analysis of Crises
To find meaning in the notion of crisis and discern  its relevance as pre -
cisely as possible, a definition is needed first of  all, along with its con -
tours. To do this, we must not talk exclusively about an “economic crisis” 
to avoid getting lost in the pursuit of theories about “crises of civilisation” 
or “crises of adolescence”. Even if one limits the analysis to an “eco -
nomic crisis”, how does an “agricultural crisis”, a n “industrial crisis” or 
a “financial crisis” fit into the frame of things? The latter has become 
something of an umbrella term: the crisis of 2008–2009 is now systemati-
cally referred to as a “ financial crisis”. For the public at large, this te rm 
has the merit of identifying a guilty party traditi onally held in rather low 
esteem.
Let us first agree on a definition.
Defining a crisis
To this end, let’s first consider the entries in the Dictionnaire de la langue 
française by Émile Littré (commonly called simply the “Littré”):
“Medical term. The turning point of a disease, announced by particular 
symptoms, such as abundant excretion, significant h emorrhaging, 
sweating, urinary deposits, etc. Happy crisis. Fatal crisis. Astrological 
opinion, falsely attributing an influence to the moon upon crises. 
Magnetic crisis, the name of the state into which magnetised people fall.

--- PAGE 29 ---
12 Decoding Economic Crises
Figurative. A perilous or decisive moment. A crisis is in the offing. 
Business is in a state of crisis. A very dangerous political crisis.
Disturbance in production. Industrial or commercial crisis, disturbance, 
disruption of industrial operations or commercial transactions, suspend-
ing their execution. Financial crisis, considerable financial difficulties 
affecting public finances or business. Monetary crisis, financial difficul-
ties resulting from the scarcity of money. Crises sometimes lead to 
higher prices for products, sometimes to lower prices. Wine crisis. 
Subsistence crisis.
Ministerial crisis, when a ministry is dissolved without being replaced.
Nature crisis, in reference to the great convulsions that occur on earth.
Etymology: from the Greek Κρίσις, “a decision”, from ϰρίνειν, “to 
decide, judge””.
The Littré, which was first published in the 1870s, opens with the 
medical meaning of the term. It then departs from its literal use to its 
usage in figurative language, where the economy has pride of place.
Since the 19th century, the French term “crisis” has entered common 
usage as denoting a “disturbance of industrial operations or commercial 
transactions”. Interestingly, in English texts referring to situations of this 
kind, “crisis” is not the immediate equivalent of the French term. The 
book by John Kenneth Galbraith [1908–2006] on the events of 1929 goes 
by the title The Great Crash, with crash normally denoting an “accident”, 
and was translated into French as La crise économique de 1929 . As for 
The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008  by Paul 
Krugman, it was translated as Pourquoi les crises reviennent toujours.
The generally held view is that Swiss historian and economist Jean 
Charles Léonard Simonde de Sismondi [1773–1842] was the first econo -
mist to systematically use the term “crisis”. At a time when economics 
was largely dominated by French and English thinkers, “distress” was the 
term used to denote an economic situation characterised by unemploy -
ment and a contraction of activity. This departure from the literal use of 
the term can be traced to French economists, particularly Sismondi. 
Having witnessed firsthand the French Revolution, which his Swiss-born 
family fled, crisscrossing Europe before returning home to Geneva, 
Sismondi fell under the spell of Adam Smith’s works. He was attracted by 
their positive content and spirit, in contrast to the violence and despair of 

--- PAGE 30 ---
Theoretical Analysis of Crises 13
Jacobin politics in France. However, he found France under the Bourbon 
Restoration to be repugnant. Having wed a Welshwoman in 1819, he was 
appalled by the condition of the working class in his wife’s country. In his 
Nouveaux principes d’économie politique , published in 1819, Sismondi 
broke with classical economists, developing a systematic critique of this 
school of economic thought. He contended that supply did not create suf -
ficient demand, contrary to what has gone down in the annals as Say’s 
law, named after the famous French economist who formulated it. There 
followed that, according to Sismondi, it was under-consumption, unbri -
dled competition (leading to excessive falls in prices) and uncertainty that 
led to “crises”, which would ultimately bring about the demise of the 
market economy. As for a solution, Sismondi advocated supporting 
demand.
To this end, Sismondi considered that there were three possible eco -
nomic policies, which he described as follows:
(1) “Egyptian” consists of having the state shoulder a significant part of 
demand in the form of large works. With this proposition, Sismondi 
was one of the precursors of modern Keynesianism and one of the 
first thinkers to look into stimulus policies.
(2) “Sybarite” is based on a system for the distribution of purchasing 
power. For Sismondi, the central issue for an economy is that if firms 
increase wages, they increase their costs, reduce their profitability and 
ultimately go bankrupt. On the other hand, if firms maintain exces -
sively low wages, there will be insufficient outlets for their goods. His 
proposition, therefore, was for the state to manage demand through an 
income policy based on large-scale redistribution using taxation. It is 
still all about stimulus, but this time acting on consumption.
(3) “Athenian” focuses on avoiding overproduction by reducing working 
time. This would encourage the development of culture and lead to, 
as in ancient Athens, the creation of places where citizens might con-
gregate to exchange and discuss all manner of things.
The Panic of 1825 gave wide notice to Sismondi’s theories about the 
economy’s difficulty finding outlets for its production and the need for 
public action to mitigate the consequences of overproduction. In The 
Communist Manifesto, Karl Marx saluted Sismondi’s criticism of capital-
ism, especially in Britain, where it had found its fullest expression. At the 
same time, the German philosopher dismissed the man as an exemplary 

--- PAGE 37 (SAMPLE) ---
20 Decoding Economic Crises
one country; others are pandemics and spread around the world, like 
cholera. The word ‘cycle’ does not imply any idea of disorder or of 
disturbance. On the contrary, it conjures up the idea of rhythm. This is 
the law of this world, that of regularity in alternation, to which all phe -
nomena of the physical order seem to be subject — not only the alterna-
tion of the seasons, but the barometric variations, the rise and fall of the 
glaciers, the precession of the equinoxes — and also those of the eco -
nomic order, such as the balance of trade, the oscillations in the rate of 
interest, etc. There is nothing mysterious about this. There are only two 
possible states of affairs: immobility, which would be death, or oscilla -
tions around a position of equilibrium, which is life. From this perspec -
tive, it seems quite natural that all economic phenomena should take the 
form of a more or less regular wave line”. 
He insists: 
“But above all, the most striking characteristic of crises is their 
periodicity. They follow one another with the regularity and majesty of 
a sea ball, each wave having an amplitude of about ten years, of which 
four or five years in ascending motion, four or five years in descending 
motion”. 
Charles Gide then sets out Jevons’ own analysis:
“Such regularity could not be attributed to chance;  it suggested the idea 
of some astronomical cycle. So we find Jevons turni ng to the skies for 
an explanation, and believing he had found it in th e periodic recurrence 
of sunspots. At the time, the widely held view was that the maxima or 
minima of these spots occurred more or less every ten years. What might 
be the link between sunspots and crises? Well, the varying intensity of 
the sun’s rays resulted in good or bad harvests, in  turn determining cri-
ses. It would seem everything was considered in this cosmogonic novel”. 
For Jevons, it is not just the crisis but the cycle itself that is exoge -
nous. Charles Gide mocked this “as mere romancing”, even if today 
physicists and meteorologists have given some relevance to Jevons’ point 
of view. His is an endogenous interpretation that inspires the solutions he 
advocates:

--- PAGE 74 (SAMPLE) ---
57
Chapter 4 
The Great Depression and Debt  
Deflation
The financial crises that strike the United States and the European Union 
generally unfold in two to three phases. During the first phase, when the 
financial crisis is triggered, the deterioration in the balance sheets of 
financial institutions, the fall in share prices and mounting uncertainty 
contribute to a contraction in lending, brought about by an exacerbation 
of adverse selection and moral hazard. This may lead to a second phase, 
characterised by a decline in economic activity, a banking panic and a 
malfunctioning of the credit channel. The combination of these factors 
can lead to a banking crisis.
If there is no resolution of the financial crisis, the economic downturn 
causes an unanticipated fall in the general price level, and the recovery 
process cannot kick in. A third phase then follows: debt deflation. When 
this happens, the unanticipated sharp fall in the general price level 
becomes entrenched, leading to a still greater fall in the net worths of busi-
nesses because of the increased debt burden. When debt deflation takes 
hold, problems to do with adverse selection and moral hazard are exacer -
bated, triggering a long-term depression in loans, investment spending 
and the overall level of economic activity.
For all those worried (or delighted, for there are some) by the difficul-
ties of capitalist economies, the 1929 crisis is the mother of all crises, to 
be avoided (or at least meditated upon). The crisis had its genesis on 
24 October 1929, with the fall in prices on the New York Stock Exchange. 
This day went down in the annals of history as Black Thursday. It was 

--- PAGE 111 (SAMPLE) ---
94 Decoding Economic Crises
on supporting the banking sector, going so far as to nationalise certain 
banks, and implementing a quite conventional package of fiscal measures 
to support an economy on the back foot. In 2007, relative to GDP, fiscal 
deficits reached 2.8% in the United States, 0.7% in the euro area, 2.7% in 
the United Kingdom and 2.4% in Japan. By 2009, fiscal deficits had dete-
riorated to 11.2% in the United States, 6.4% in the euro area, 11.4% in the 
United Kingdom and 8.7% in Japan.
Commenting on the implementation of these stimulus plans, 
Dominique Strauss-Kahn, who was attending the G20 summit in his 
capacity as the managing director of the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), declared during the closing press conference that nearly all the 
participants had backed the IMF’s proposal to use the fiscal tool and 
placed the emphasis on a coordinated fiscal stimulus in order to be more 
effective, concluding that as a result, the situation was really changing. 
The 2008–2009 crisis marked the start of an unprecedented escalation in 
both public and private debt.
By 2016, when one can consider that the 2008–2009 crisis was over, 
the world’s debt stood at $164,000 billion, or 225% of GDP. It consisted 
of 63% private debt and 37% public sector debt.
Just as after the 1975 crisis the OECD published “Towards full 
employment and price stability — A report to the OECD by a group of 
independent experts” 18 and then after the 1993 crisis The OECD Jobs 
Study, in 2009 it published the “OECD strategic response to the financial 
and economic crisis — Contributions to the global effort”, aimed at “tack-
ling regulatory and policy failures comprehensively”, with “the focus […] 
on the interactions between finance, competition and governance, and, 
ultimately, on achieving sustainable growth”.
It summarised its recommendations as follows:
“In the current context, an optimal policy strategy  to restore  
sustainable long-term growth should include the fol lowing key 
components:
–  keeping markets open;
–  sound macroeconomic, fiscal and labour market policies for stability 
and resilience;
18 Commonly known as the McCraken Report.