--- PAGE 2 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES

--- PAGE 3 ---
MANIAS, 
PANICS, AND 
CRASHES
A HISTORY OF FINANCIAL CRISES
Seventh Edition
ROBERT Z. ALIBER
Emeritus Professor of International Economics and Finance, 
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago
and
CHARLES P. KINDLEBERGER
formerly Ford Professor of Economics, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


--- PAGE 4 ---
© Charles P. Kindleberger and Robert Z. Aliber 2005, 2011, 2015 
© Charles P. Kindleberger 1978, 1989, 1996, 2000 
Foreword © Robert M. Solow 2015 
Afterword © Robert Skidelsky 2015
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this
publication may be made without written permission.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency,
Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The authors have asserted their rights to be identified as the authors of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First edition published 1978
Second edition published 1989
Third edition published 1996
Fourth edition published 2000
Fifth edition published 2005
Sixth edition published 2011
Seventh edition publish 2015 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited,
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke,
Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic im print of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
ISBN: 978–1–137–52575–8
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing
processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the
country of origin.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of congress cataloging-in-publication data
Kindleberger, charles poor, 1910–2003.
     Manias, panics and crashes : a history of financial crises / charles 
p. Kindleberger, formerly ford professor of economics,massachusetts institute of 
technology, usa, robert z. Aliber, professor of international economics and finance, 
university of chicago graduate school of business, usa. – Seventh edition.
      Pages cm
     Revised edition of manias, panics, and crashes, 2011.
    Isbn 978–1–137–52575–8
     1. Financial crises. 2. Business cycles. 3. Depressions. I. Aliber, robert z. Ii. Title.
Hb3722.K56 2015
338.5942—Dc23 2015017424


--- PAGE 5 ---
CONTENTS
List of Tables vi
Foreword vii
Robert M. Solow
Introduction 1
 1  Financial Crises: a Hardy Perennial 5
 2  The Anatomy of a Typical Crisis 38
 3  Speculative Manias 53
 4  Fueling the Flames: the Expansion of Credit 78
 5  The Critical Stage – When the Bubble Is About To Pop 104
 6  Euphoria and Paper Wealth 132
 7  Bernie Madoff: Frauds, Swindles, and the Credit Cycle 143
 8  International Contagion 1618–1930 183
 9  Bubble Contagion: Mexico City to Tokyo to Bangkok to 
New York, London, and Reykjavik 200
10  Euromania and Eurocrash 224
11  Policy Responses: Benign Neglect, Exhortation, and Bank Holidays 235
12  The Domestic Lender of Last Resort 260
13  The International Lender of Last Resort 279
14  The Lehman Panic – An Avoidable Crash 313
15  The Lessons of History 340
Epilogue 369
Notes 379
Afterword 404
Lord Robert Skidelsky
Index 407

--- PAGE 6 ---
LIST OF TABLES
 6.1  World’s tallest buildings  133
 8.1  Reported failures in the crisis of 1847–48, 
by cities (number of failures)  193
13.1  Official finance commitments (last-resort lending) 
($US billions) 307

--- PAGE 7 ---
FOREWORD
Charlie Kindleberger (CPK from now on) was a delightful colleague: perceptive, 
responsive, curious about everything, full of character, and, above all, lively. 
Those same qualities are everywhere evident in Manias, Panics, and Crashes . 
I think that CPK began to work on the book in the spirit of writing a natural 
history, rather as Darwin must have done at the stage of the Beagle – collecting, 
examining, and classifying interesting specimens. Manias, panics, and crashes 
had the advantage over rodents, birds, and beetles that they were accompa-
nied by the rhetoric of contemporaries, sometimes with insight, sometimes 
just blather. It was CPK’s style as an economic historian to hunt for interesting 
things to learn, not to pursue a systematic agenda.
Obviously, then, he would have had a field day with the housing bubble, the 
piling-up of risk, the financial panic of 2008, and the evaporation of perceived 
wealth that followed it and led to the recession from which we are – at best – just 
emerging. The whole story was ripe for CPK: it was big, it was international in 
scope, and it implicated a whole zoo of new shadow-banking institutions, finan-
cial derivatives, and financial practices. And, God knows, it produced a lot of 
rhetoric before, during, and after.
Of course, he was an economist by training and experience, and he soon 
found patterns and regularities, and causes and effects. What caught his eye 
especially were the irrationalities that seemed so often to enmesh those directly 
or indirectly enmeshed in the events themselves. By itself that would have been 
merely entertaining. The story got interesting for CPK with the interaction of 
behavior and institutions. The occurrence of manias, panics, and crashes, and 
their ultimate scope, also depended very much on the monetary and capital-
market institutions of the time.
CPK could not have known at the start just how hardy a perennial financial 
crises would turn out to be. The quarter-century after the publication of the first 
edition featured a whole new level of turbulence in national banking systems, 
exchange-rate volatility, and asset-price bubbles. There was always new material 
to be digested in successive editions. This history cannot have been merely the 
result of increasing human irrationality, though CPK would have been charmed 
by what a German friend of ours called ‘Das Gesetz der Verschlechtigung aller 

--- PAGE 8 ---
viii FOREWORD
Dinge’ (the Law of the Deterioration of Everything). Increasing wealth, faster 
and cheaper communication, and the evolution of national and international 
financial systems also played an indispensable role, as sketched in Chapter 13, 
added to later editions by Robert Aliber. CPK’s effort at economic history found 
a subject that does not appear to be going out of style.
The shape of a ‘new financial architecture’ and the possible utility of a 
lender of last resort – national and/or international – along with the guidelines 
that ought to govern it were also among CPK’s preoccupations. He would cer-
tainly have been fascinated – and probably gratified – by the way the Federal 
Reserve acted during the crisis not only as lender of last resort to the banking 
system but almost as lender of last resort to the whole economy. He might have 
felt much the same about the innovative responses to which his one-time stu-
dent, Mario Draghi, led the European Central Bank. Those who are engaged in 
reforming (or at least changing) the system would do well to ponder the lessons 
that emerge from this book.
One of those lessons is very general, and is most applicable in contexts 
where irrationality may trump sober calculation. CPK was a skeptic by nature, 
just the opposite of doctrinaire. He mistrusted iron-clad intellectual systems, 
whether their proponents were free marketeers or social engineers. In fact, he 
considered clinging to rigid beliefs in the face of disconcerting evidence to be 
one of the more dangerous forms of irrationality, especially when it is prac-
ticed by those in charge. The international economy would be a safer place if 
CPK’s tolerant skepticism were more common among the powers that be. I am 
thinking, in particular, about current discussions of the so-called ‘Washington 
consensus’, and the pros and cons of both freely floating exchange rates and un-
fettered capital markets.
Any reader of this book will come away with the distinct notion that large 
quantities of liquid capital sloshing around the world should raise the possibility 
that they will overflow the container. One issue omitted in the book – because 
it is well outside its scope – is the other side of the ledger: What are the social 
benefits of free capital flow in its various forms, the analogue of gains from 
trade? CPK, whose specialties as an economist included international trade, in-
ternational finance, and economic development, would have been sensitive to 
the need for some pragmatic balancing of risks and benefits. One can only hope 
that the continued, up-to-date availability of this book will help to spread his 
open-minded habit of thought.
As he carries the seventh edition up to date, Aliber emphasizes the likeli-
hood that the roughly concurrent credit bubbles in a number of different coun-
tries are interrelated events, possibly responses to a common disturbance. It 
seems implausible that the appearance of housing-based credit bubbles in the 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ixFOREWORD
United States, the UK, Ireland, and Spain merely reflects independent rolls of 
the dice. Aliber shows how these events are transmitted internationally through 
current account imbalances in a world in which capital moves easily across 
borders. The analytically and empirically validated causal connection made by 
Aliber between fluctuations in cross-border investment flows and subsequent 
banking crises in a world of floating exchange rates now amounts to a full-
blown model. CPK, as a specialist in international economics, would probably 
have cottoned on to this account.
A more complicated question, also surfaced by Aliber, is whether there are 
successive ‘waves’ of credit bubbles that are causally related. If this is so, it has 
important implications for the design of future regulation, both domestically 
and internationally. We are now well beyond natural history.
It seems to me that the Aliber version preserves this basic Kindleberger ori-
entation but imposes a little more order on CPK’s occasionally wayward path 
through his specimen cabinets. More manias, panics, and crashes may plague 
us, but readers of this book will at least have been inoculated.
Robert M. Solow

--- PAGE 10 ---
INTRODUCTION TO THE  
SEVENTH EDITION
Robert Z. Aliber
I
t was my great good fortune to inherit Manias  from Charles Kindleberger 
after he had brought out the first four editions. The first edition of Manias 
was published in 1978, four years before the first major post-World War II 
global banking crisis and more than forty years after the Great Depression of 
the 1930s. Kindleberger had been discussing some the ideas about the causes of 
these periodic banking crises in his classes at MIT for three or four years before 
the first edition was published. The motivation may have been the surge in 
loans from the major international banks to the governments and government-
owned firms in Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and ten other developing countries; 
the external indebtedness of these countries was increasing by 20 percent a 
year, perhaps three times the increases in their GDPs. These rates of growth 
of indebtedness were too high to be sustainable. Kindleberger was focused on 
the ‘end game’ and the adjustments that were likely when the lenders concluded 
that they should slow the increase in their loans to these indebted borrowers. 
The insight that led to Manias was the instability in financial markets during 
the 1920s and the 1930s and the Great Depression. He was concerned that the 
move to a floating currency arrangement after the US Treasury closed its gold 
window after the historic Camp David weekend of August 1971 was likely to be 
a source of financial instability.
Kindleberger’s approach relied on contemporary and historic accounts of 
the surges in the prices of securities and real estate and the subsequent crashes; 
he quoted John Stuart Mill, Walter Bagehot, Alfred Marshall, and many others. 
He grouped the remarks of these authors by the stages of the financial cycle – 
first the increases in the prices of real estate and securities, then their observa-
tions when prices peaked, and then in the debacle as prices crashed. The third 

--- PAGE 11 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES2
feature of his approach followed Hyman Minsky’s emphasis that changes in 
the supplies of credit were pro-cyclical; increases in the supply prolonged the 
expansion in the boom and decreases intensified the subsequent crash. Minsky 
viewed banking crises in a domestic context, Kindleberger extended the per-
spective to an international context; he noted that the failure of a bank in Ohio 
led to shortages of credit in Hamburg and in Scandinavia.
Each of the three editions of Manias after the first followed a wave of banking 
crises, which often occurred together with a currency crisis when the prices of 
the currencies of the indebted countries declined sharply and borrowers in these 
countries defaulted on their foreign loans. The second edition was published in 
1989, a few years after the governments of Mexico and ten other developing coun-
tries defaulted on their US dollar loans. The prices of their currencies declined 
sharply and many of the banks in these countries failed; the credit-worthiness of 
several of the largest US banks was tested by their losses on their loans to the gov-
ernments in these countries. Hundreds of US banks and thrift institutions failed 
at the same time. The second wave of banking crises was in the early 1990s and 
centered on Japan; the prices of securities and real estate declined sharply. Finland 
and Sweden experienced financial crises at the same times; asset prices and prices 
of their currencies declined, and banks failed. The fourth edition appeared in 
2000, soon after the Asian Financial Crisis; once again was that the prices of the 
currencies of the indebted countries declined and the banks failed.
One of the self-imposed constraints as the fifth edition was being prepared 
was not to change any substantial arguments that were in the fourth edition. 
Boxes were introduced as contemporary examples of the themes in the sev-
eral chapters. The boom in prices of stocks in the 1990s brought forth Enron, 
MCIWorldCom, and numerous other firms when corporate management 
was seduced by ready availability of cheap credit to adopt practices that were 
obviously corrupt. When the credit supply increases at a rapid rate, the Bernie 
Madoffs of the world flourish because they can rely on the investment inflows 
for the cash to pay the interest on their outstanding indebtedness. But when the 
credit supply begins to increase less rapidly , some of them tumble in to bank -
ruptcy because they can no longer rely on the cash from new loans to pay the 
interest on their indebtedness. The lenders forget that they should ask, ‘Where 
will the borrowers get the cash to pay us the interest if we stop providing them 
with the cash in the form of new loans?’
Kindleberger was one of the few economists of his generation who was 
skeptical of the case for floating currencies that had been advanced by Milton 
Friedman, Gottfied Habeler, and other giants of the professions in the 1950s 
and the 1960s. As the sixth edition was prepared for publication, the intuition 
was that there was a systematic relationship between increases in cross-border 

--- PAGE 12 ---
INTRODUCTION 3
investment inflows to a country and increases in the prices of its securities 
and its currency. An extended box was introduced into the sixth edition about 
Iceland’s experience between 2002 and 2008; a massive cross-border invest-
ment inflow had led to a sharp increase in the price of the krona and a nine-
fold increase in stock prices. The investment inflow led to a massive surge in 
the domestic supply of credit that enabled households to splurge on their pur-
chases of stocks. The Icelandic economy boomed; the country’s imports and its 
trade deficit surged. After the supply of new foreign loans froze at the time of 
the Lehman crisis in September 2008, the price of Icelandic stocks declined by 
more than 90 percent and the price of the currency declined by 50 percent.
Nearly every banking crisis in the last thirty years has been associated with 
a decline in cross-border investment inflows that led to a decline in the price of 
a country’s currency. Every country that experienced a banking crisis had previ-
ously experienced an economic boom. These booms morphed into busts when 
the investment inflows slowed.
One theme of the seventh edition is that the extensive variability in the prices 
of currencies, securities, and real estate that has been evident since the early 
1970s has followed from the variability in cross-border investment inflows. An 
increase in cross-border investment inflows leads to higher prices for securities 
and currencies, and economic booms. Banking crises occurred when national 
curr e n ci es  w e r e  an c h o r ed  t o  g o l d  in  th e  nin et ee n th  ce n tury .  Th ese  crises  ar e  
both more frequent and more severe when currencies are not anchored to pari-
ties because of the feedback from the increase in investment inflows to more 
rapid increase in the prices of securities and to the economic booms. The dra-
matic surge in US real estate prices after 2002 followed an increase in foreign 
purchases of US dollar securities.
This view that the source of banking crises are the surges in cross-border 
investments challenges the dominant policy view that the banking crisis of 
2008 followed from the wayward behavior of Countrywide Financial, Lehman 
Brothers, Northern Rock, et al. The financial establishment – the central bank-
ers and the regulators – have mistaken the symptoms of the crisis for the causes. 
These firms create credit when they buy the IOUs of prime borrowers and sub-
prime borrowers; they buy more mortgages when credit conditions are more 
expansive. The surges in the credit supplies follow from increases in investment 
inflows and from domestic monetary expansion.
As this book goes to press in 2015, the dominant policy issue is when Greece 
will leave the European Monetary Union. The global financial crisis that began 
in 2008 and 2009 involved the United States, Britain, Spain, Ireland, Iceland, 
Portugal, and Greece. Iceland recovered quickly. By the beginning of 2015, 
each of these countries except Greece was growing at a rate between one or two 

--- PAGE 13 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES4
percent. In contrast, the unemployment rate in Greece was above 25 percent. 
Five years of austerity in Athens had not led to a significant increase in the 
international competitiveness of the Greek economy.
One advantage of a floating currency arrangement is that the decline in 
the price of a country’s currency may facilitate a more rapid recovery from a 
financial crisis, much as in Iceland, since the demand for domestic goods and 
services increases as the country becomes more competitive. The Irish economy 
recovered relatively quickly from its banking crisis even though Ireland lacked 
its own currency; costs and prices in Ireland were more flexible downward than 
they have been in Greece.
One dominant feature of a flexible exchange rate arrangement is that the 
differentials in interest rates on similar securities denominated in various cur-
rencies will change by larger amounts than when countries are committed to 
retaining parities. The changes in interest rates in each country are motivated 
primarily by the intent of the central bank to manage monetary policy to achieve 
its domestic price level and employment targets. The changes in the differen-
tials between the interest rates in one country and those in its trading partners 
have led to much larger cross-border investment inflows. These inflows lead to 
increases in indebtedness of those borrowers that are willing to pay the higher 
interest rates. In Ireland and Spain, these borrowers were involved in real estate 
while the government was the dominant borrower in Greece. When the inflows 
to Ireland and Spain slowed, real estate prices declined sharply, and many of the 
lenders to the buyers of real estate failed. When the inflows to Greece slowed, 
the government was unable to make both its payments for the purchases of 
domestic goods and services, and its debt service payments to its foreign credi-
tors. The financial crisis in Athens was prolonged because the governments in 
Northern European countries continued to provide credit to the government of 
Greece because they wanted to avoid the political consequences of the country’s 
exit from the European Monetary Union.
The story of the nineteenth century is that banking crises occur when 
countries have anchored their currencies to gold. The story of the decades since 
the move to a floating currency arrangement is that banking crises are more 
severe and more frequent than when currencies are not anchored to parities. 
The variability of cross-border investment inflows is much larger when central 
banks are not constrained by the need to anchor their currencies to parities, 
since the differentials in interest rates and the changes in these differentials are 
much larger. These inflows induce economic booms as an integral part of the 
adjustment process; eventually one or several of the lenders recognize that the 
borrowers’ indebtedness is too large or has been increasing too rapidly, and the 
slowdown in the inflows triggers the crises.

--- PAGE 14 ---
1
FINANCIAL CRISES: A HARDY  
PERENNIAL
T
he years since the early 1970s are unprecedented in terms of the large changes 
in the day-to-day and month-to-month prices of commodities, currencies, 
bonds, stocks, and real estate relative to their long-run average prices. There 
have been four waves of banking crises; a large number of lenders in three, four, 
or more countries collapsed at about the same time as the prices of real estate 
and securities in these countries and the prices of their currencies fell sharply. 
Each country that experienced a banking crisis also had a recession as house-
hold wealth declined in response to the sharp fall in the prices of securities and 
real estate, and as the banks became much more reluctant suppliers of credit as 
their own capital was depleted. The Great Recession that began in 2008 was the 
most severe and the most global since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
The first wave of banking crises was in the early 1980s when Mexico, Brazil, 
Argentina, and ten other developing countries defaulted on their $800 billion 
of US-dollar-denominated indebtedness. The second wave occurred in the 
early 1990s and engulfed Japan and two of the Nordic countries – Finland and 
Sweden; Norway had had a similar crisis a few years earlier. The Asian Financial 
Crisis that began in mid-1997 was the third wave; initially Thailand, Malaysia, 
and Indonesia were involved and subsequently South Korea, Russia, Brazil, and 
Argentina were impacted. The banking crisis that impacted Mexico during its 
presidential transition at the end of 1994 was the forerunner for the crisis in 
Southeast Asia thirty months later, because the preconditions in the months 
prior to these crises were so similar. The fourth wave began in September 2008 
with the failure of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two large US-government-
sponsored mortgage lenders and the collapse of Lehman Brothers a few days 

--- PAGE 15 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES6
later; the debacle of these lenders were responses to the sharp decline in the 
price of US real estate that had started at the beginning of 2007. Britain, Spain, 
Ireland, and Iceland also were involved in the fourth wave; a year later the prices 
of the bonds of the Greek and the Portuguese governments fell sharply.
Each of these waves of banking crises was preceded by surges in cross-bor-
der investment inflows, which led to increases in the prices of currencies and 
increases in the prices of securities and real estate in the countries that expe-
rienced these inflows. Thus the external indebtedness of these countries had 
increased for two, three, or more years prior to their crises. Moreover the domes-
tic indebtedness of a group of borrowers also had increased at paces that often 
were two or three times higher than the interest rate. Usually these borrowers 
used the money to buy real estate – homes and commercial properties. However, 
the first wave of surges in cross-border indebtedness involved the rapid growth 
in the US dollar indebtedness of governments and government-owned firms in 
Mexico and other developing countries throughout most of the 1970s; the major 
international banks purchased the IOUs of these borrowers. Japan was the key 
country in the second wave of banking crises that began in the early 1990s, real 
estate prices and stock prices had increased by a factor of five to six in the second 
half of the 1980s. At about the same time the prices of both securities and real 
estate surged in Finland, Norway, and Sweden. The third wave of surges in cross-
border indebtedness that began in the early 1990s involved Mexico and several 
other countries in Latin America, and Thailand and its neighbors in Southeast 
Asia. Real estate prices in the United States, Britain, Spain, Ireland, and Iceland 
began to increase sharply from about 2003 until the end of 2006.
The banks headquartered in Reykjavik were primarily involved in cross-
border investment inflows to Iceland as a way to increase the amounts they 
could lend to Icelandic households and businesses, including many that they 
owned. Banks headquartered in Stockholm and Bangkok also sold their IOUs 
in foreign centers to obtain the funds that they could use to increase their 
domestic loans, because the apparent cost was below the cost of selling their 
IOUs in their domestic markets. The domestic counterpart of the increase in 
cross-border investment inflows to these countries – and the increase in the 
net external debtor position of these countries – was that the indebtedness of a 
group of domestic borrowers surged. Thus banks headquartered in many coun-
tries sold their own IOUs in a foreign banking center so they could increase 
their domestic loans; in some cases the loans to these domestic borrowers were 
denominated in a foreign currency and the borrowers incurred the currency 
exposure.
The indebtedness of these domestic borrowers increased at rates that were 
too rapid to be sustained; similarly the external indebtedness of these countries 

--- PAGE 16 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 7
increased at rates that were too rapid to be sustained. Eventually one or several 
of the lenders became more cautious because the borrowers’ indebtedness was 
increasing too rapidly relative to their incomes. When the indebtedness of a 
group of borrowers increases by 20 to 30 percent a year, the borrowers have an 
impeccable record for paying the scheduled interest in a timely way. Eventually 
their ability to increase their indebtedness slows, and the ‘day of reckoning’ 
occurs when one or several no longer have enough money from new loans to 
pay the interest on outstanding loans. Then the prices of real estate and of stocks 
decline. Moreover when the rate of growth of indebtedness slows, the prices of 
currencies decline and often very sharply.
When real estate prices decline, households are the first group to incur 
losses, since the market value of their homes – the most significant asset that 
most households own – declines. Some households default on their mortgage 
indebtedness, and the losses then revert to banks and other lenders. If these 
lenders fail, the losses then fall on their depositors and other creditors to the 
lenders unless the government intervenes to protect them from loss. When real 
estate and stock prices declined in Japan in the early 1990s, a large number of 
banks and other financial institutions failed. The fall in real estate and stock 
prices in Thailand in mid-1997 triggered declines in the prices of currencies 
and the prices of securities throughout Southeast Asia; recessions followed. 
However, there were no significant failures of US financial firms when US stock 
prices declined by 40 percent between 2001 and 2003, and the ensuing recession 
was brief and shallow.
That the range of movement in the prices of national currencies since the 
early 1970s has been much larger than in earlier periods when currencies were 
not anchored to parities is not a surprise. The major surprise has been that the 
deviations between the market prices of currencies and the long-run equilib-
rium or average prices of these currencies has been much larger than when the 
currencies were anchored to parities. The transition from the Bretton Woods 
arrangement of adjustable parities for national currencies to one of floating 
exchange rates began in August 1971 when the United States abandoned the 
gold parity of $35 an ounce that had been established in 1934. The effort to 
retain a modified version of the adjustable parity arrangement that was formal-
ized in the Smithsonian Agreement of 1972 failed early in 1973 and a floating 
currency arrangement was adopted by default. At the beginning of the 1970s, 
the dominant view was that the prices of the German mark and the Japanese 
yen might increase by 10 to 12 percent because the inflation rates in both coun-
tries had been below the US rate in the previous few years.
Another surprise is that the prices of both the German mark and the 
Japanese yen increased much more rapidly than anticipated through most of the 

--- PAGE 17 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES8
1970s; then the prices of both currencies declined sharply in the first half of the 
1980s, although not to the levels of the early 1970s. The prices of the Mexican 
peso, the Brazilian cruzeiro, the Argentinean peso, and of the currencies of 
many other developing countries declined by 30 to 40 percent or more in the 
early 1980s. The prices of the Finnish markka, the Swedish krona, the British 
pound, the Italian lira, and the Spanish peseta declined by more than a third in 
the last six months of 1992. The price of the Mexican peso declined by nearly 50 
percent during the country’s presidential transition at the end of 1994. Similarly 
the prices of most of the Asian currencies – the Thai baht, the Malaysian ring-
git, the Indonesian rupiah, and the South Korean won – declined sharply during 
the Asian Financial Crisis in the summer and autumn of 1997. The price of the 
euro, the new currency that eleven members of the European Union adopted at 
the beginning of 1999, soon declined by 30 percent, and then increased by 50 
percent beginning in 2002. The price of the Argentinean peso declined by more 
than two-thirds in the first few months of 2001. The price of the Icelandic krona 
fell by 50 percent in the last few months of 2008.
These changes in the prices of individual currencies were much larger than 
those that were suggested by the differences between the inflation rate in a 
country and the inflation rates in its major trading partners. The ‘overshoot-
ing’ and ‘undershooting’ of national currencies were much larger than in any 
previous period.
Moreover the changes in the market prices of commodities, securities, 
stocks, and real estate relative to their long-run average prices also have been 
much greater than in earlier periods. The increases in commodity prices in 
the 1970s were spectacular. The US dollar price of gold increased from $40 an 
ounce at the beginning of the 1970s to nearly $1000 ten years later; the price 
was $450 at the end of the 1980s and $283 at the end of the 1990s. The price 
reached nearly $2000 in the autumn of 2012. The price of oil was $2.50 a barrel 
at the beginning of the 1970s and $40 at the end of that decade; in the mid-
1980s the oil price was $12 and then in 1980 the price increased to $40 after the 
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The oil price reached nearly $150 in the early summer 
of 2008, and then declined below $50 and then increased to the range of $80 
to $110.
The number of bank failures during the 1980s and the 1990s was much 
larger than in earlier decades. Several of these failures were isolated events: 
both Franklin National Bank in New Y ork City and Herstatt A G in Cologne, 
Germany, had made large bets on the changes in prices of currencies in the 
early 1970s that they subsequently lost. Crédit Lyonnais, once the largest bank 
in France and a government-owned firm, rapidly increased its loans in the effort 
to become a first-tier international bank and its bad loans eventually cost the 

--- PAGE 18 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 9
French taxpayers the equivalent of more than $30 billion. However, the fail-
ures of most banks and other financial firms resulted from systemic shocks 
that led to dramatic changes in the financial environment. Three thousand US 
savings and loan associations and other thrift institutions failed in the 1980s, 
with losses to the American taxpayers of more than $100 billion; initially they 
failed because of a surge in short-term interest rates relative to long-term inter-
est rates. Hundreds of banks in the oil-producing and grain-producing states 
failed when the anticipation that the US inflation rate would continue to accel-
erate was shattered.
Most of the banks in Japan failed in the early 1990s when the prices of 
Japanese real estate and stocks declined; their losses incurred were several times 
larger than their capital and virtually all these firms became wards of the gov-
ernment because there was an implicit guarantee that depositors would not lose 
money. Similarly, when the prices of the Mexican peso and the currencies of 
the other developing countries declined sharply in the early 1980s, most of the 
banks in these countries went under because of the combination of the large 
loan losses by their domestic borrowers who had liabilities denominated in the 
US dollar in part due to the massive revaluation losses they had incurred when 
the prices of their own currencies declined. Similarly, many of the banks in 
Finland, Norway, and Sweden went bankrupt when the prices in their real estate 
and stock markets declined sharply in the first half of the 1990s, after very large 
increases in the previous four and five years. Most of the Mexican banks failed 
at the end of 1994 when the price of the Mexican peso fell by 50 percent. In 
the same way most of the banks in Thailand, Malaysia, and South Korea, and 
several of the other Asian countries – except for Hong Kong and Singapore – 
failed after the mid-1997 Asian Financial Crisis. The sharp declines in prices 
of residential real estate in the United States, Britain, Ireland, and several other 
countries that began toward the end of 2006 led to massive government invest-
ments in the banks so they could remain open and their depositors would not 
incur losses. In 2008 most of the top US investment banks were wiped out or 
forced to seek a stronger merger partner. The British government ‘nationalized’ 
Northern Rock, the largest mortgage lender in the country in September 2007, 
and became the dominant shareholder in the Royal Bank of Scotland as it pro-
vided massive amounts of new capital to the bank. The Irish government made 
extensive investments in the six largest banks in the country in the effort to 
keep them from closing. The three large banks in Iceland were taken over by the 
government. Countrywide Financial, the largest mortgage lender in the United 
States, was acquired by Bank of America, which subsequently acquired Merrill 
Lynch, one of the largest US investment banks – but then Bank of America 
required a large injection of capital from the US Treasury to remain in business. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES10
The US government made a massive investment in Citibank. The Dutch govern-
ment provided extensive capital to ING, the insurance–banking conglomerate.
These banking crises resulted from the sharp declines in the prices of real 
estate and securities and from the sharp declines in the prices of currencies. The 
costs of these crises were extremely high in terms of several metrics – the losses 
incurred by the banks as a ratio of a country’s GDP and as a share of govern-
ment spending, the slowdowns in the rates of economic growth, the increases in 
unemployment and in the output gaps in each country.
The massive number of bank failures, the large changes in the prices of 
currencies and sharp variability in the prices of securities were systematically 
related and resulted from rapid changes in the global economic environment. 
The 1970s was a decade of accelerating inflation, the largest-ever sustained 
increase in the US price level in peace-time. The US dollar price of gold surged 
because some investor bought the precious metal on the basis of the cliché that 
‘gold is a good inflation hedge’; however the increase in the gold price was many 
times larger than the contemporary increase in the US and world price levels. 
Toward the end of the 1970s investors purchased gold because its price was 
increasing – and its price was increasing because investors were buying more 
of this commodity.
The prevailing view in the late 1970s was that the US and world inflation 
rates would accelerate. Some analysts predicted that the gold price would reach 
$2500 an ounce.
The range of movement in bond prices and stock prices in the 1970s was 
much greater than in the several previous decades. In the 1970s the real rates 
o f  r e turn  o n  b o th  U S  d o ll ar  b o n d s  an d  U S  s t o c ks  w e r e  n e g a ti v e  b e c a u s e  th e  
prices of both types of securities declined at a time when the goods price level 
increased.
The foreign indebtedness of Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and other develop-
ing countries as a group increased from $125 billion in 1972 to $800 billion in 
1982. The President of Citibank said ‘countries don’t go bankrupt’. The bor-
rowers in these countries had a stellar record for paying the interest on their 
loans on a timely basis. Then in late October 1979 the Federal Reserve adopted 
a sharply contractive monetary policy; interest rates on US dollar securities 
surged. The US dollar price of gold peaked in January 1980 and then began to 
decline as inflationary anticipations were reversed. The price of the US dollar 
surged and continued to increase for five years. The sharp increase in inter-
est rates on US dollar securities meant that the borrowers in Mexico and other 
developing countries defaulted on their indebtedness denominated in the US 
dollar, because their interest payments surged and they could no longer rely on 
money from new loans to pay the interest on their outstanding loans. Moreover, 

--- PAGE 20 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 11
the real rates of return on US dollar bonds and US stocks averaged more than 15 
percent a year in the 1980s and the 1990s as the annual inflation rates declined 
and the prices of these securities surged.
The increase in real estate prices and stock prices in Japan in the 1980s of 
several hundred percent was associated with a boom in the economy; Japan 
as Number One: Lessons for America
1 was a bestseller in Tokyo. The Japanese 
banks increased their deposits and their loans and their capital much more rap-
idly than banks headquartered in the United States and in Germany and in other 
European countries. The Japanese banks owned both real estate and stocks, and 
as the prices of both types of securities increased, bank capital soared. Seven or 
eight of the ten largest banks in the world were headquartered in Tokyo or in 
Osaka. Then at the beginning of the 1990s real estate prices and stock prices 
in Japan crashed. Within a few years many of the leading Japanese banks and 
financial institutions were broke, kaput, bankrupt, and insolvent, and remained 
in business because of an implicit government guarantee. A striking story of a 
mania and a crash – but without a panic, because depositors believed that bank 
loan losses would be socialized and borne by the taxpayers.
The financial market developments in Finland, Norway, and Sweden fol-
lowed those in Japan, although they were less dramatic. The prices of real estate 
and stocks increased in the late 1980s as cross-border investment inflows to 
each country accelerated and then Finland and Sweden experienced banking 
crises about the same time as the one in Japan.
Mexico had been one of the great economic success stories of the early 
1990s as it prepared to enter the North American Free Trade Agreement. The 
Bank of Mexico had adopted a tough contractive monetary policy that led to a 
reduction in the country’s annual inflation rate from 140 percent to less than 
10 percent in four years, a truly remarkable achievement, much more impressive 
than the reduction in the US inflation rate ten years earlier. During the same 
period several hundred government-owned firms were privatized and business 
regulations were liberalized. Cross-border investment flows to Mexico acceler-
ated beca use the real rates of return on governmen t securities w ere high and 
because the prospective profit rates on industrial investments also were high. 
Investors anticipated that Mexico would become the low-cost base for produc-
ing automobiles and washing machines and many other manufactured goods 
for the US and Canadian markets. The price of the Mexican peso increased 
in real terms in response to the cross-border investment inflows, and Mexico’s 
trade deficit climbed to 7 percent of its GDP and its external debt to 60 percent 
of its GDP.
Then several political incidents associated with the presidential election 
in 1994 led to a sharp decline in investment inflows; for many months the 

--- PAGE 21 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES12
government of Mexico supported the price of the peso in the currency market, 
and then as its ability to support the peso became exhausted, the price of the 
peso declined sharply. Once again the decline in the price of the peso resulted 
in large losses for Mexican borrowers with US dollar liabilities, and most of 
the Mexican banks – which had been privatized in the previous several years 
– failed.
Real estate prices and stock prices surged in Thailand, Malaysia, and 
Indonesia in the first half of the 1990s; these were the ‘dragon economies’ that 
seemed likely to emulate the earlier economic success of the ‘Asian tigers’ – 
Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong, and Singapore. Firms based in Japan, Europe, 
and the United States invested in these countries as low-cost sources of supply, 
much as US and foreign firms had invested in Mexico as a low-cost source of 
supply for the North American market. European and Japanese banks rapidly 
increased their loans to firms and banks in these countries. Then in the autumn 
and winter of 1996, domestic lenders in Thailand experienced large losses on 
their domestic loans because they had not been sufficiently discriminating in 
their evaluations of the willingness of Thai borrowers to pay the interest on 
their credit card indebtedness. Foreign lenders sharply reduced their purchases 
of Thai securities, and then the Bank of Thailand, much like the Bank of Mexico 
thirty months earlier, did not have the money to support the baht in the cur-
rency market. The sharp decline in the price of the baht in early July 1997 led to 
investment outflows from other Asian countries and the prices of their curren-
cies (except for the Hong Kong dollar and the Chinese yuan, which remained 
rigidly pegged to the US dollar) declined by more than 30 percent. The price of 
the Indonesian rupiah declined by more than 80 percent. Most of the banks in 
the region – except for those in Hong Kong and Singapore – would have been 
bankrupt in any reasonable ‘mark-to-market’ test.
The crisis spread to Russia, there was a debacle in the ruble, and the coun-
try’s banking system collapsed in the summer of 1998. Investors then became 
more cautious and they sold risky securities denominated in various foreign 
currencies and bought safer US government securities. The changes in the rela-
tionship between the interest rates on these two groups of securities led to the 
collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, then the largest US hedge fund.
The 1990s surge in NASDAQ stocks
Stocks in the United States are traded on the over-the-counter market and on one 
of the organized stock exchanges, primarily the New York Stock Exchange. The 
typical pattern was that shares of young firms initially would be traded on the over-
the-counter market and then most of these firms would incur the costs associated 
with listing their shares for trading on the New York Stock Exchange because they 

--- PAGE 22 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 13
believed that the market for their stocks would become broader and lead to higher 
prices for their stocks. Some very successful new firms associated with the infor-
mation technology revolution of the 1990s – Microsoft, Cisco, Dell, Intel – were 
exceptions to this pattern; they chose not to list their shares on the New York Stock 
Exchange because they believed that trading stocks electronically in the over-the-
counter market was superior to trading stocks by the open-outcry method used on 
the New York Stock Exchange.
In 1990 the market value of stocks traded on the NASDAQ was 11 percent of that 
of the New York Stock Exchange; the comparable figures for 1995 and 2000 were 
19 percent and 42 percent. The annual average percentage rate of increase in the 
market value of NASDAQ stocks was 30 percent during the first half of the decade 
and 46 percent during the next four years. Several of the newer firms traded on 
the NASDAQ would eventually became as successful as Microsoft and Intel and 
higher prices for their stocks were warranted. The likelihood that all of the firms 
whose stocks were traded on the NASDAQ would be as successful as Microsoft was 
extremely small, since it implied that the profit share of US GDP would be two to 
three times higher than it ever had been previously.
The sharp increase in US stock prices in the second half of the 1990s was 
associated with a remarkable US economic boom; the unemployment rate 
declined sharply, the inflation rate declined, and the rate of economic growth 
and productivity both accelerated. The US government developed its largest-
ever fiscal surplus in 2000 after having had its largest-ever fiscal deficit in 1990. 
The remarkable performance of the economy contributed to the surge in US 
stock prices that in turn led to the increase in investment spending and con-
sumption spending, and an increase in the US growth rate.
US stock prices began to decline in the spring of 2000 and fell by 40 per-
cent in the next three years while the prices of NASDAQ stocks declined by 
80 percent.
US real estate prices began to increase at an above-average rate in 2002. Real 
estate prices increase in the long run, in part because of the increase in the gen-
eral price level and in part because of the increase in nominal GDP. (Much of the 
increase in real estate prices reflects increases in the price of land.) The Federal 
Reserve maintained low interest rates because the US economy seemed slug-
gish, and house prices increased three times as rapidly as the general price level. 
Much of the increase in home prices occurred in sixteen states that account for 
50 percent of US GDP. The sharp increase in property prices led to a construc-
tion boom, and housing starts reached two million units a year – about 500,000 
more units than the number required to satisfy the growth in population and 
the losses due to fires, storms, the widening of highways and similar factors. 
Part of the increase in demand was from investors who sought profits from the 

--- PAGE 23 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES14
continued increases in real estate prices; the rate of increase was much higher 
than the interest rate.
The sharp decline in the price of residential real estate and the debacle in 
the prices of mortgage-related securities after 2007 has led to many US-centric 
books that explain the surge in prices in terms of the failure of regulation or the 
greed of the bankers or the vagaries of new financial instruments.
In part the large number of crashes in national financial markets in the last 
thirty years reflects that there are more independent countries, each with its 
own central bank. Nevertheless despite the lack of perfect comparability across 
periods, the conclusion is unmistakable that banking crises have been more 
extensive and pervasive.
One of the themes of this book is that the surges in the prices of real estate 
and stocks that often occur in several different countries at the same time have 
similar causes. Thus the sharp increase in the external indebtedness of develop-
ing countries in the 1970s occurred because the major international banks rap-
idly increased their loans to borrowers in these countries; these banks believed 
that commodity prices would continue to increase and that the growth rates 
in these countries would remain high and the revenues of their governments 
also would continue to increase. The likelihood that the sharp increases in 
real estate prices in the United States, Britain, Ireland, Iceland, Spain, South 
Africa, and several other countries that began in about 2002 and the subsequent 
crashes were independent events seems low; increases in real estate prices in 
each of these countries followed from rapid increases in cross-border invest-
ment inflows and the domestic supply of credit in both. There were unique idi-
osyncratic aspects in these different national markets; the market in subprime 
mortgages seems uniquely American. The rapid growth in the supply of credit 
led to a sharp increase in the demand for mortgage loans, which was greater 
than the supply of prime loans and the mortgage brokers ginned up a large 
increase in the supply of subprime mortgages.
A second theme is that the likelihood that the four waves of banking crises 
over a thirty-year period were unrelated events is low. The banking crisis in 
each country was preceded by a surge in the supply of credit. Several of these 
banking crises laid the basis for the subsequent surge in the supply of credit to 
borrowers in a different group of countries. The financial crises in the develop-
ing countries in the early 1980s had a knock-on effect that contributed to the 
three-fold plus increases in the prices of real estate and of stocks in Japan in the 
second half of the 1980s. The banking crisis in Tokyo in the early 1990s led to 
an increase in cross-border investment inflows to Thailand and Malaysia and 
Indonesia, which led to the increases in the prices of real estate and of securities 
in these countries and to higher prices of their currencies in real terms. When 

--- PAGE 24 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 15
Thailand and its neighbors experienced their banking crises, investment flows 
to the United States expanded rapidly as the borrowers in these countries repaid 
loans; the price of the US dollar increased and the US trade deficit increased by 
$150 billion.
The cross-border investment inflows led to ever-higher prices for securities, 
as if the money from the sale of securities to foreigners was the proverbial ‘hot 
potato’ that was rapidly passed from one group of investors to others at ever-
increasing prices. Moreover the price of the country’s currency moved upward 
unless the authorities intervened to limit such increases – and even then the 
price of the currency often increased in real terms, that is after adjusting for the 
difference between the inflation rate in the country and the comparable rates in 
its trading partners.
The third theme centers on the source of credit, and the relation between 
the monetary authorities – the central bank in each country – and the banks 
and other private sector lenders. The policy response after every banking crisis 
is to apply additional regulations to the firms like Lehman and Countrywide 
and Northern Rock, as if they had been the villains of the crisis rather than the 
victims. Lehman et al. primarily are the channels for the distribution of credit; 
while they create credit when they buy more loans, they purchase more loans 
only if the monetary environment is expansive.
MANIAS AND CREDIT AND BOOKS
The production of books on financial crises is counter-cyclical. A spate of books 
on the topic appeared in the 1930s following the US stock market bubble in the late 
1920s and the subsequent crash and the Great Depression. Relatively few books on 
crises appeared during the several decades immediately after World War II.
The first edition of this book was published in 1978, after US stock prices 
had declined by 50 percent in 1973 and 1974 following a fifteen-year bull mar-
ket when there was a three-fold increase in stock prices.. The sharp decline in 
stock prices and the US recession led to the bankruptcies of the Penn-Central 
railroad, several of the large steel companies and a large number of Wall Street 
brokerage firms. New York City was on the verge of default on its outstanding 
bonds and was saved from insolvency by the State of New York. Not quite a 
crash, unless you were a senior official or a stockholder in one of the firms that 
failed or the Mayor of New York City.
The sixth edition was published after the sharp decline in the price of US 
real estate and the failure of the investment banks and more than 400 com-
mercial banks and the implosion of the dot.com bubble in US stocks in the late 
1 9 9 0 s .  B a n k s  f a i l e d  a t  a b o u t  t h e  s a m e  t i m e  i n  B r i t a i n ,  I r e l a n d ,  I c e l a n d ,  a n d  

--- PAGE 25 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES16
Spain. The seventh edition was prepared as the global economy was recovering 
from the Great Recession of 2008 and as the European Monetary Union was 
struggling because of a continuing banking crisis during a period of sluggish 
economic growth. Moreover, China appeared on the verge of financial melt-
down after thirty years of brilliant economic achievements
Each of these surges in the supply of credit has been global, in that four, five, 
or more countries have been involved. Moreover, the surges in the credit supply 
appear to be becoming larger, judged by the absolute value of the increase in 
household wealth.
Books on the 2008 financial crisis
The collapse of US investment banks and commercial banks in 2007 and 2008 and 
2009 has led to a large number of books on the banking crisis from three differ-
ent groups of authors. Many are by journalists, including Gillian Tett, who wrote 
Fool’s Gold: How Unrestrained Greed Corrupted a Dream, Shattered Global Markets, 
and Unleashed a Catastrophe . Andrew Ross Sorkin brought out Too Big to Fail: The 
Inside Story of How Wall Street and Washington Fought to Save the Financial System 
– and Themselves . Roger Lowenstein authored The End of Wall Street , Justin Fox 
wrote The Myth of the Rational Market: A History of Risk, Reward, and Delusion on 
Wall Street, and Scott Patterson produced The Quants; How a New Breed of Math 
Whizzes Conquered Wall Street and Nearly Destroyed It. The theme of market irra-
tionality is also explored in John Cassidy’s How Markets Fail; The Logic of Economic 
Calamities. Michael Lewis’s The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine  focused 
on a few individuals who early on realized that there was a bubble in the housing 
market, and that exceptional profits could be achieved from short-selling mortgage-
related securities. Then there was Suzanne McGee’s Chasing Goldman Sachs: How 
the Masters of the Universe Melted Wall Street Down ... And Why They Will Take Us 
to the Brink Again and The Meltdown Years: The Unfolding of the Global  Economic 
Crisis by Wolfgang Munchau, Charles R. Morris’s The Trillion Dollar Meltdown: 
Easy Money , High Rollers, and the Great Credit Crash , James Grant’s Mr Market 
Miscalculates: The Bubble Years and Beyond , Charles Gasparino’s The Sellout: How 
Three Decades of Wall Street Greed and Government Mismanagement Destroyed 
the Global Financial System , Barry Rithholtz’s Bailout Nation: How Greed and Easy 
Money Corrupted Wall Street and Shook the World Economy , and Meltdown: How 
Greed and Corruption Shattered Our Financial System and How We Can Recover by 
Katrina vanden Heuvel and the Editors of The Nation.
Some of the books are by academics. One of the first was Richard Posner’s The 
Failure of Capitalism. Robert J. Shiller produced The Subprime Solution  and George 
A. Akerlof together with Shiller wrote Animal Spirits ; some of the chapters in this 
book focus on the 2008 crisis. Simon Johnson and James Kwak authored 13 Bankers: 
The Wall Street Takeover and the Next Financial Meltdown. Raghuram G. Rajan wrote 
Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy, Joseph Stiglitz 

--- PAGE 26 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 17
produced Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy and 
Nassim Nicholas Taleb brought out The Theory of Black Swan Events, a critique of the 
prevailing consensus in academic finance about market efficiency. Thomas Sowell’s 
contribution was The Housing Boom and Bust, while a group of fifteen distinguished 
economists brought out The Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System , with 
more than thirty recommendations for changes in regulations. Amar Bhide wrote A 
Call for Judgment, which integrates modern finance and classical economics, while 
Nouriel Roubini and Stephen Mihm brought out Crisis Economics: A Crash Course 
in the Future of Finance.
A third group of books are by ‘insiders’, individuals who had formerly been with 
a banking firm or with a government. One group of insiders had been with banking 
firms. Lawrence McDonald wrote A Colossal Failure of Common  Sense: the Inside 
Story of the Collapse of Lehman Brothers , his former employer. William D. Cohan, 
a former banker turned journalist, brought out House of Cards: A Tale of Hubris 
a n d  W r e t c h e d  E x c e s s  o n  W a l l  S t r e e t, while Alex Pollock, another former banker, 
published Boom and Bust: Financial Cycles and Human Prosperity . George Cooper, 
a financial analyst, wrote The Origin of Financial Crises .
Most of these books are US-centric and ignore or minimize the increases and 
crashes in the property markets in other countries. However, there have been three 
books on the crisis in Iceland – Meltdown Iceland: Lessons on the World Financial 
Crisis from a  Small Bankrupt Island , by Roger Boyes, a British journalist, Why 
Iceland? by Asgeir Jonsson, a former senior banker with Kaupthing, one of the fallen 
firms, and Frozen Assets: How I Lived Iceland’s  Boom and Bust , by Eftir Armann 
Thorvaldsson, a former UK head of the same bank. Moreover the government 
of Iceland that came to power after the collapse established an Icelandic Special 
Investigation Commission which produced Causes of the Collapse  of the Icelandic 
Banks – Responsibilty, Mistakes, and Negligence ; the authors were Pali Hreinsson, 
Tryggvie Gunnarsson, and Sigridur Benediktsdottir.
The US Congress established a bi-partisan, ten-member Financial Crisis Inquiry 
Commission, which held extensive hearings and interviewed witnesses from 
the leading financial firms. Both former Chairman Alan Greenspan and former 
Secretary of the Treasury Robert Rubin testified before the commission. The FCIC’s 
report was published in December 2010 (and is available at www.fcic.gov/report).
The titles and subtitles of these books express common themes – greed, the 
malfunctioning of markets, the corruption of Wall Street and the capture of 
Washington and the regulators by the bankers. And more greed.
The shortcoming of most of these books is that they give no explanation for why the 
crisis occurred when it did, nor do they have an explanation for why some countries 
were involved but not others. Were the problems in Iceland a spinoff from the United 
States, or were the problems of the largest and the smallest affected countries a result 
of a common factor? Was there a sharp increase in greed of the bankers soon after the 
beginning of the new millennium, or was the greed always there and released by some 
other event?

--- PAGE 27 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES18
Moreover, the focus of these books is usually micro, and centered on the failure of 
rationality and the inability of the lenders to foresee the consequences of the increase 
in indebtedness of the borrowers. Asset bubbles – most asset bubbles – are a monetary 
phenomenon and result from the rapid growth of the supply of credit. The view that 
excessively rapid increases in the prices of goods and services result from the rapid 
growth in the money supply is accepted – the axiom is that ‘inflation always is a 
monetary phenomenon’. The counterpart is that ‘real estate bubbles always are a 
credit phenomenon’.
The seventh edition of this book appears nearly forty years after the first and 
also after thirty of the most tumultuous years in global financial markets, a 
period without a good historical precedent in terms of monetary turbulence.
The big ten financial bubbles
1. The Dutch Tulip Bulb Bubble 1636
2. The South Sea Bubble 1720
3. The Mississippi Bubble 1720
4. The late 1920s stock price bubble 1927–29
5. The surge in bank loans to Mexico and other developing countries in the 1970s
6. The bubble in real estate and stocks in Japan 1985–89
7. The 1985–89 bubble in real estate and stocks in Finland, Norway, and Sweden
8.  The bubble in real estate and stocks in Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, and several 
other Asian countries 1992–97 and the surge in foreign investment in Mexico 
1990–94
9. The bubble in over-the-counter stocks in the United States 1995–2000
10.  The bubble in real estate in the United States, Britain, Spain, Ireland, and Iceland 
between 2002 and 2007
The earliest mania noted in the box involved tulip bulbs in the Netherlands in 
the seventeenth century. Two of the manias – one in Britain and one in France – 
occurred at the end of the Napoleonic Wars. The manias and banking crises in 
the nineteenth century often occurred after an extended investment in infra-
structure such as canals and railroads. Banking crises were frequent between 
1920 and 1940. The percentage increases in stock prices in the past thirty years 
have been larger than in earlier periods, and six of the ten manias in the box 
have occurred in this period. Sharp increases in prices of real estate and of 
stocks often have occurred together, in part because many companies listed on 
the various stock exchanges own large amounts of real estate.
Manias are dramatic but they have been infrequent; only two have occurred 
in US stocks in two hundred years. Manias almost always have occurred dur-
ing the expansion phase of the business cycle because the euphoria associated 

--- PAGE 28 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 19
with the mania led to increases in spending. During the mania the increases in 
the prices of real estate or stocks or in one or several commodities contribute 
to increases in consumption spending and in investment spending that in turn 
lead to a quickening of economic growth. Seers in the economy forecast per-
petual economic growth and some venturesome ones even proclaim an end to 
recessions and declare that traditional business cycles have become obsolete. 
The more rapid growth induces investors and lenders to become more optimis-
tic, and the prices of securities and real estate increase more rapidly.
Hollywood and the global banking crisis
The global banking crisis of 2008 has led to both film documentaries and to 
Hollywood thrillers. Charles Ferguson’s Inside Job  won an Academy Award as the 
best documentary of 2011. Ferguson interviewed money traders, academic econo-
mists, and even a New York city madam about her clients and the spending habits of 
the money traders. Ferguson also visited Iceland, and interviewed several individu-
als there. Ferguson’s story is that the traders were corrupt, and the crisis resulted 
from too many loans going to subprime borrowers.
Too Big To Fail is based on A ndrew Ross Sork in’s accou nt of t he relat ionship bet ween 
the regulators and the large banks. Citibank and Bank of America have continued in 
business, but only because of the timely intervention of the US Government.
Manias – especially macro manias – are associated with economic eupho-
ria; business firms become increasingly upbeat and investment spending surges 
because credit is plentiful. In the second half of the 1980s Japanese industrial 
firms could borrow as much as they wanted from their friendly bankers in 
Tokyo and Osaka; money seemed ‘free’ (money always seems free in manias) 
and the Japanese went on both a consumption spree and an investment spree. 
The Japanese purchased ten thousand items of French art. A racetrack entrepre-
neur from Osaka paid $90 million for Van Gogh’s Portrait of Dr Guichet, at that 
time the highest price ever paid for a painting. The Mitsui Real Estate Company 
paid $625 million for the Exxon Building in New York, even though the initial 
asking price had been $510 million; Mitsui wanted to get in the Guinness Book 
of World Records for paying the highest-ever price for an office building. In 
the second half of the 1990s in the United States newly established firms in the 
information technology industry and in biotech had access to virtually unlim-
ited funds from the venture capitalists who believed they would profit greatly 
when the shares in these firms were first sold to the public.
During these euphoric periods an increasing number of investors 
seek short-term profits from the increases in the prices of real estate and of 
stocks. Investors make down payments for the purchase of apartments in the 

--- PAGE 29 ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES20
 pre-construction phase in the anticipation that they will be able to sell these 
apartments at handsome profits when the buildings have been completed, or 
even before.
Then there is a shock – perhaps a change in government policy, an unex-
plained failure of a firm previously thought to have been successful – that leads 
to a pause in the increase in the prices of securities. Soon some of the investors 
who had financed most of their purchases with borrowed money become dis-
tress sellers because the interest payments on the money borrowed to finance 
their purchases are larger than the rental income on the real estate and the divi-
dends on the stocks. The prices of these securities decline below their purchase 
prices and now the buyers are ‘under water’ – the amounts owed on the money 
borrowed to finance the purchases of these securities are larger than their cur-
rent market prices. Their distress sales lead to sharp declines in the prices of the 
securities and a crash and a panic are likely to follow.
The economic situation in a country after several years of mania-like behav-
ior resembles that of a young bicycle rider who needs to maintain the forward 
momentum – if the bike stops moving forward, the rider becomes unstable and 
crashes. The analogy is that if the prices of securities stop increasing, they will 
then decline rather than remain more or less unchanged at the new and higher 
plateau. During the mania, the prices of real estate and securities increase, and 
they begin to decline immediately after they stop increasing – there is no pla-
teau, no ‘middle ground’. The decline in the prices of some securities leads to 
the concern that prices will decline further and that the banking system will 
experience ‘distress’. The rush to sell these securities becomes self-fulfilling and 
so precipitous that it resembles a panic. The prices of commodities – houses, 
buildings, land, stocks, bonds – crash to levels that are 30 to 40 percent of their 
prices at the peak. Bankruptcies surge, economic activity slows, and unemploy-
ment increases sharply.
There is a biologic regularity in the pattern in each of these manias even 
though there are differences in details. The increase in prices of commodities 
or real estate or stocks leads to euphoria among investors; household wealth 
increases and consumption spending climbs. There is a sense of  ‘We never had 
it so good’. Then the prices of securities peak and begin to decline. Some bank-
ing crises were preceded by a rapid increase in the indebtedness of one or several 
groups of borrowers rather than by a rapid increase in the price of a security.
One theme of this book is that the cycle of manias and panics results from 
the pro-cyclical changes in the supply of credit, which increases rapidly in good 
times, and then when economic growth slackens, the rate of growth of credit 
declines sharply. The decline in the rate of growth of credit often triggers the 
beginning of the decline in the prices of currencies and securities. A mania 

--- PAGE 30 ---
FINANCIAL CRISES 21
involves increases in the prices of securities or real estate or currencies or com-
modities in the present and the near-future that are not consistent with the 
prices of the same securities or real estate or currencies in the distant future. 
The forecasts that the price of oil would increase to $80 a barrel after the ear-
lier increase from $2.50 a barrel at the beginning of the 1970s to $36 at the end 
of that decade was manic. During the economic expansions investors become 
increasingly optimistic and more eager to pursue profit opportunities that will 
pay off in the distant future while the lenders become less risk-averse. Rational 
exuberance morphs into irrational exuberance, economic euphoria develops 
and both investment spending and consumption spending increase. There is 
a pervasive sense that it is ‘time to get on the train before it leaves the station’ 
and the exceptional profit opportunities disappear. Security prices increase 
further and even more rapidly. An increasingly large share of the purchases of 
these securities is undertaken in anticipation of short-term capital gains and an 
exceptionally large share of these purchases is financed with credit.
The banking crises that are analyzed in this book are major in size and in 
effect and most are international because they involve several different coun-
tries either at the same time or in a causal, sequential way.
The term ‘bubble’ is a generic term for the increases in the prices of securi-
ties or currencies in the mania phase of the cycle that cannot be explained by 
the changes in the economic fundamentals. Surges in real estate prices and 
stock prices that occurred in the second half of the 1980s in Japan and in the 
early and mid-1990s in some of the Asian countries followed the pattern of a 
bubble; investors were buying real estate and stocks because their prices had 
been increasing, and their prices had been increasing because investors were 
buying these assets. The sharp increases in the US dollar price of gold and in 
the US dollar price of silver in the late 1970s were manic, but the increases 
in the price of crude petroleum in the same years were not; the distinction is 
that many of the buyers of gold and silver in that tumultuous and inflationary 
decade anticipated that the prices of both precious metals would continue to 
increase and that profits could be made from buying and holding these com-
modities for relatively short periods. In contrast many of the buyers of petro-
leum were concerned that the disruptions in oil supplies due to actions of the 
cartel and the war in the Persian Gulf would lead to shortages and increases 
in prices.
Ponzi finance, chain letters, pyramid schemes, manias, and bubbles
Ponzi finance, chain letters, bubbles, pyramid schemes, and manias are somewhat 
overlapping terms for non-sustainable patterns of financial behavior, in that the 
prices of securities today are not consistent with the anticipated prices at distant 

--- PAGE 109 (SAMPLE) ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES100
 non-interest-bearing money at one end of the spectrum and very long-term debt 
(ideally, perpetual obligations) at the other. Simons advocated a system in which 
all financial wealth would be held in equity form with no fixed-money contracts 
so that only banks could create effective money substitutes. He was concerned 
about the speculative temper of the community and the ease with which short-
term non-bank borrowing and lending made society vulnerable to changes in 
business confidence.
Simon’s recommendations to limit the character of money and financial 
securities were very different from Friedman’s liberal propensity to let market 
forces determine the demand and supply for different types of financial secur-
ites.
57 Friedman was confident that control of the growth of the money supply 
would prevent major business cycles and that there was no need to fear that the 
credit mechanism would not be stable. Even if Simons’s positive proposals were 
desirable (and there is grave doubt on this score) they are utopian and hence not 
practical. Nevertheless Simons’s diagnosis of the tendency of the system toward 
unstable short-term borrowing and repayment is similar to the Minsky view.
In the last several decades still another viewpoint on the relations of money 
and banking to economic stability has come into prominence from the neo-
Austrian school that wants to decontrol money and banking entirely. This 
group, led by Friedrich Hayek in Britain, Roland Vaubel in Germany and 
Richard Timberlake, Leland Yeager, Lawrence White, and George Selgin in the 
United States, seeks to abolish an active monetary policy. Any bank, company 
or person would be allowed to issue ‘money’; they believe that market forces will 
determine which firms issue good money. Each firm will compete to ensure that 
its money is accepted, and so good money will drive out bad. White defends the 
position on the basis of the experience of the Scottish banks that were unregu-
lated between the failure of the Ayr Bank in 1772 and the Bank Act of 1845 
which applied the Bank Act of 1844 to Scotland.
58
During this period the leading commercial banks accumulated the notes of 
the lesser ones and were ready to convert them to specie if they thought the sup-
ply of currency notes issued by any bank was increasing too rapidly. The large 
banks served as informal controllers of the money supply. But several historical 
experiences – the country banks in England from 1745 to 1835, wildcat banking 
in Michigan in the 1830s, and the latest experience with bank deregulation in 
Latin America and especially in East Asia – do not support the view that ‘good 
money drives out bad’.
The global inflation of the 1970s resulted from a combination of expansive 
US monetary policy and expansive monetary policies in Europe and Japan as 
their large balance of payments surpluses led to rapid growth in their hold-
ings of international reserve assets and in their money supplies. Central bank 

--- PAGE 218 (SAMPLE) ---
BUBBLE CONTAGION 209
The recession in Japan in 1991 meant that import growth slowed mark-
edly while exports surged; some Japanese firms greatly increased their efforts 
to sell abroad because the domestic markets for their products were growing 
less rapidly than the growth in their supply capabilities. The slowdown in the 
growth of imports and the surge in the growth of exports meant that Japan’s 
trade surplus increased, which contributed to the increase in the investment 
flow from Japan and led to higher prices for the yen, which became a handi-
cap to export-oriented Japanese firms. Many increased their investments in 
China, Malaysia, and Thailand to take advantage of lower wage rates in these 
countries. 
THE EAST ASIAN ECONOMIC MIRACLE AND 
THE BUBBLE IN EMERGING-MARKET EQUITIES
Four innovations contributed to the surge in property prices and real estate 
prices in Mexico, Thailand, and other emerging-market countries in the early 
1990s. The funding of the overhang of bank loans into Brady bonds effectively 
removed these countries from their bankruptcy – and the countries were 
 re-christened as emerging markets. With the discovery of  ‘emerging market 
equities as a new asset class’, index-based mutual funds and pension funds 
began to acquire these stocks. The expectation was that these countries would 
industrialize at a rapid rate, and corporate profits of industrial firms in these 
countries would surge. Privatization of government-owned firms in resource 
extraction, communications, manufacturing, and other industries led to a 
surge in investment inflows as investors purchased shares in these firms. The 
increase in the price of the Japanese yen following the sharp decline in prices 
of securities led to the ‘hollowing out’ of the Japanese economy and led firms 
to seek lower-cost production sites in Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, and their 
neighbors.
In 1992 the World Bank published The East Asian Miracle , an expressively 
descriptive title for the economic performance of the countries in the arc from 
Thailand to South Korea; the annual increases in the rates of growth of their 
GDPs were comparable to those in Japan in the 1950s and the 1960s. The Korean 
peninsula had been fractured in the war in the early 1950s; in the mid-1960s 
South Korea began a remarkable period of rapid economic growth. Singapore 
had been a fortified swamp in the 1950s but by the 1990s had achieved a first-
world standard of living. The change in political leadership in China from Mao 
Zed o n g  t o  D e n g  Xi a o p in g  in  1 9 7 8  l ed  t o  a  dram a ti c  c h an g e  fr o m  a  se lf -co n -
tained, isolated country to one that was open and eager for international trade 

--- PAGE 327 (SAMPLE) ---
MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES318
other banks. Cleveland Trust ended up with a portfolio of high-risk borrowers – the 
developing-country equivalent of subprime borrowers in California, Nevada, and 
Florida.
During the early stages of the credit cycle there are a large number of qualified 
borrowers. The supply of credit increases more rapidly than the number of qualified 
borrowers. The choice for the Cleveland Trust was to keep dancing as long as the 
music was playing, or to sit down and lose market share
Securitization led to ‘financial deepenings’, the supply of mortgage-related 
securities increased more than twice as rapidly as the supply of mortgages. For 
example, every $100 million of new mortgage loans would lead to an increase of 
nearly $100 million of CMOs that in turn would nearly lead to an additional $100 
million of CDOs. The investment banks that established the trusts and issued 
the CMOs and the CDOs loved the fee income that they earned when they pro-
duced these new securities, since this income did not appear to be related to an 
increase in risk. During this financial deepening process the investment banks 
carried large inventories of mortgages and mortgage-related securities in their 
‘production and distribution pipelines’ awaiting sale to investors; some of these 
pipelines were six months long – that is, six months might pass from the day 
that an investment bank bought a mortgage until the day that it issued a new 
CMO that included this mortgage. A credit risk was attached to these mortgages 
as long as they were in the pipeline; some investment banks regularly hedged 
this risk.
Some of the investment banks ‘sold’ these mortgage-related securities to 
their captive affiliates if they could not be readily sold to non-related investors.
Securitization of mortgages led to an anonymous relationship between 
the homeowner borrowers and the mortgage lenders that replaced the tradi-
tional relationship where the lenders knew the borrowers because they lived in 
the same neighborhood. Later this anonymity would come to complicate the 
‘workout arrangements’ when individual borrowers had problems making their 
monthly debt-service payments. The new and anonymous relationship between 
the lenders and the borrowers invited fraud in the mortgage-origination proc-
ess. Some of the fraud was on the part of borrowers, who provided incomplete or 
misleading information about their incomes, assets, and credit histories (which 
were known as ‘liars’ loans’). Some of the fraud was by the mortgage brokers, 
who encouraged homeowners to take on indebtedness that was much too high 
relative to their incomes. The mortgage brokers knew that some of the borrowers 
were fibbing about their incomes and assets and credit histories, but they were 
not concerned about the ability of the borrowers to repay because the credit risk 
would be transferred to other firms in the mortgage loan-distribution pipeline.