--- PAGE 1 ---
Pedro Campos
Anand Rao
Joaquim Margarido   Editors
Machine Learning 
Perspectives 
of Agent-Based 
Models
Practical Applications to Economic 
Crises and Pandemics with Python, R, 
Netlogo and Julia

--- PAGE 2 ---
Machine Learning Perspectives of Agent-Based 
Models

--- PAGE 3 ---
Pedro Campos • Anand Rao . Joaquim Margarido 
Editors 
Machine Learning 
Perspectives of Agent-Based 
Models 
Practical Applications to Economic Crises 
and Pandemics with Python, R, Netlogo 
and Julia

--- PAGE 4 ---
Editors 
Pedro Campos 
University of Porto, FEP, LIAAD-INESC 
TEC 
Porto, Portugal 
Joaquim 
Margarido 
ISEP 
Porto, Portugal 
Anand Rao 
Heinz Colle
ge of Information Systems and 
Public Policy 
Carne
gie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
ISBN 978-3-031-73353-6 ISBN 978-3-031-73354-3 (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73354-3 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG 2025 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole 
or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not 
imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are belie
ved to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland 
If disposing of this product, please recycle the paper.

--- PAGE 5 ---
This book is dedicated to all our students and 
researchers who believe that it is possible to 
signiﬁcantly improve our understanding of 
complex social and economic systems with 
agent-based models and machine learning.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Editor’s Preface 
Machine Learning and Agent-based models have been around for decades, arguably 
since the early days of the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) endeavor. As the ﬁelds of 
AI and computational modeling continue to evolve, the integration of these two 
methodologies has become increasingly signiﬁcant for advancing both research and 
practical applications. 
Machine Learning (ML) has been primarily concerned about learning patterns 
from lar
ge amounts of data and predicting outcomes or classifying information. For 
example, early applications of ML included decision tree algorithms used in medical 
diagnosis. Agent-based models (ABM), on the other hand, have been primarily used 
to model and simulate the behavior of autonomous entities called agents and how 
they interact with each other. Agent-based models have been used extensively for 
capturing and analyzing emergent behavior. 
Machine Learning has grown signiﬁcantly over the past three decades and 
has found 
a broad range of applications across several sectors like ﬁnancial ser-
vices, healthcare, media and entertainment, retail, manufacturing, agriculture, etc. 
Advances in deep learning, speciﬁcally around embeddings, attention mechanisms, 
and quantization have revolutionized the development of multi-modal foundation 
models. The number of ML algorithms and foundation models has expanded 
with literally hundreds or even thousands of distinct algorithms and hundreds of 
proprietary and open-source foundation models. The basis of ML algorithms has 
also evolved from statistical models to neural network models in deep learning, 
becoming increasingly larger and more sophisticated, typically now running into 
billions of parameters. 
Agent-based models on the other hand have also grown over the decades 
becoming increasingly 
sophisticated in capturing complex interactions and behav-
iors. They have been widely used in social sciences to analyze, simulate, and 
intervene in individual and group behaviors. Agents have evolved from modeling 
emergent behaviors seen in the physical world to acting as digital twins with a 
two-way near real-time interaction between the physical and digital to the more 
recent conversational LLM-based agents. A fundamental characteristic underlying 
all these different types of agents is the fact that these agents are embedded in an
vii

--- PAGE 7 ---
viii Editor’s Preface
environment, continuously interacting with it and with other agents, and carrying 
out tasks or fulﬁlling goals on behalf of others. 
Machine Learning acknowledges agents when it comes to reinforcement learn-
ing. Reinforcement 
learning is one of the best-known techniques for agents 
embedded in an environment to learn based on environmental feedback in terms of 
rewards or penalties. Over time, reinforcement learning has evolved, signiﬁcantly 
impacting areas such as robotics and autonomous systems. The more recent usage 
of the word “agents” within the deep learning and Large Language Model (LLM) 
community is to enable conversational entities to access external tools, take actions, 
and communicate with other agents. 
Agent-based models recognize Machine Learning, especially reinforcement 
learning as 
one type of learning behavior. However, Agent-based models have 
typically looked at analyzing and modeling a variety of behaviors including collab-
orative or adversarial behaviors, programmed or emergent behaviors, negotiation, 
and counterfactual analysis. For example, an ABM study might simulate a market 
where agents learn to trade through reinforcement learning, enhancing the realism 
of economic models. More recently machine learning is being used as a technique 
for calibrating sophisticated agent-based models. 
As someone who has worked in both these areas over the past 35 years, I ﬁnd 
it strange 
that there are very few books or collection of papers that bring these two 
areas closer together. The lack of integrated research has posed signiﬁcant chal-
lenges, often resulting in missed opportunities for leveraging combined strengths. 
This book addresses these gaps by providing a comprehensive examination of the 
overlap between these ﬁelds. With the increasing adoption of both Agent-based 
models and Machine Learning it makes sense to look at the overlap between these 
two ﬁelds. As a result, this collection of papers brought together on “Machine 
Learning Perspectives of Agent-Based Models” is a very timely publication. 
The particular focus of this collection is on bringing together ABM and ML 
to analyze, 
predict, and intervene during crisis. While COVID-19 was the most 
traumatic event of the current century, it did bring to fore both Agent-based 
modeling (a typical text-book example to study the spread of epidemics is agent-
based modeling), and machine learning that was able to exploit the large volumes of 
data that was available from the pandemic. Detailed methodologies and case studies 
within this collection illustrate how these tools were pivotal in understanding and 
managing the crisis. 
This collection goes beyond the COVID-19 pandemic, demonstrating applica-
tions in 
modeling ﬁnancial crisis, organizational learning, strategic alliances, and 
automotive industry. It demonstrates the beneﬁts of integrating Machine Learning 
with Agent-based models to gather deeper insights and more meaningful behavioral 
interventions. Chapters dedicated to ﬁnancial market simulations and conﬂict 
scenarios provide a broad view of the utility of these models. 
Finally, this collection also addresses some of the ethical and transparency 
considerations as 
we move into the widespread adoption and application of these 
models into larger AI systems. Veriﬁcation and validation of simulations are more 
challenging than predictions and more sophisticated ML techniques can go a long

--- PAGE 8 ---
Editor’s Preface ix
way in improving the state of the art in validation and calibration of Agent-based 
models. The book emphasizes robust validation techniques to ensure the reliability 
of simulations and predictions, fostering trust and acceptance among stakeholders. 
In conclusion, “Machine Learning Perspectives of Agent-Based Models” is a 
groundbreaking and 
timely publication that bridges the gap between two rapidly 
growing research areas that is ﬁnding widespread commercial application. It is 
an invaluable resource for researchers, practitioners, and policymakers aiming to 
leverage the combined strengths of ML and ABM to address complex societal 
issues. I sincerely hope that this collection would be the ﬁrst of many to bring 
researchers, practitioners, and policymakers together to address important crises and 
solve societal problems. 
Distinguished Professor of Applied Data Science 
and AI, Heinz College of Information Systems 
and Public Policy 
Prof. Anand S. Rao 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
June 2024 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Preface 
Agent-Based Models (ABM) provide a promising alternative for understanding 
economic processes. ABMs are microscale models that simulate the interactions 
of heterogeneous agents based on simple rules. Unlike traditional models, ABMs 
consider factors like limited information, bounded rationality, and market disequi-
librium, making them more suitable for capturing the complexity of real-world 
economic systems. “A Machine Learning perspective of Agent-Based Models: 
Applications to Economic Crises and Pandemics” explores the synergy between 
ABMs and Machine Learning, showcasing practical examples in different lan-
guages. The text advocates for a shift toward more dynamic and realistic modeling 
approaches, such as ABMs, to better understand and address the complexities of 
economic crises. It also highlights the potential of incorporating Machine Learning 
techniques to enhance the capabilities of these models. This integration could aid in 
not only enhancing the interpretability of ABMs but also in reﬁning the predictive 
capabilities of the models, especially when dealing with the dynamic and uncertain 
nature of economic crises and pandemics. 
This book discusses the challenges of dealing with uncertainty and instability 
in the 
global economy, particularly in the context of frequent crises like the 
COVID-19 pandemic, ﬁnancial crises, and wars and it highlights the limitations 
of traditional economic models, especially the neoclassical approach, in explaining 
complex economic phenomena. We discuss how ABMs can be applied to study 
the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on healthcare systems and economic 
stability. Furthermore, the text introduces the integration of Machine Learning (ML) 
and deep-learning models into ABMs to enhance interpretability and prediction 
capabilities. The discussion highlights the challenges of interpreting predictions 
from complex ML models and underscores the importance of ethical considerations, 
transparency, and model validation in the context of complex simulations. 
The book aims to simplify the presentation of models for undergraduate students, 
using programming 
languages such as Python, R, NetLogo, and Julia. 1 The idea is
1 Program codes are available in: https://ml4agents.free.nf 
xi

--- PAGE 10 ---
xii Preface
to be able to function as a guide for creating agent-based models from the scratch 
using game theory (such as the Ultimatum game, or a simple currency exchange 
game), and machine learning as a paradigm. It emphasizes the importance of a 
learning-by-programming approach and includes practical examples of economic 
and management phenomena modeled through ABMs. 
Divided into four parts, the book covers foundational concepts, explores diverse 
applications in 
crises, develops an economic game from the scratch, and concludes 
with case studies and extensions. 
This book comes at a time when generative AI is emerging. Generative AI 
plays a 
signiﬁcant role in science and society, and it can also contribute to the 
creation and understanding of complex simulations, such as Data Augmentation, 
Scenario Exploitation, and Human-AI Collaboration, since Generative AI tools can 
facilitate collaboration between human modelers and AI systems. By generating 
suggestions for model adjustments or proposing alternative scenarios, generative AI 
supports the iterative development of ABMs. This collaborative approach enhances 
the model-building process, leveraging the strengths of both human expertise and 
AI capabilities. 
But these aspects will be left open for a future edition! 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA Anand Rao 
Porto, Portugal Pedro Campos 
Porto, Portugal Joaquim Margarido 
June 2024 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Acknowledgments 
We thank the collaboration of the authors of this book: Ali R. Vahdati, Ana 
Nogueira, Arit Kumar Bishwas, Conceição Rocha, Friederike Wall, Inês Ferreira, 
Jeremy Pitt, José Matos, Joseph V oyles, Margarida Silva, Mark Paich, Marta 
Moraes, Pavel Brazdil, Rosaldo J. F. Rossetti, Sindy Ma, Sonia Teixeira, and Zafeiris 
Kokkinogenis.
xiii

--- PAGE 12 ---
Contents 
1 Introduction ................................................................. 1 
Pedro Campos 
Part I Agent-Based Modelling and Machine Learning 
2 Agent-Based Modeling and Learning in Economics: An Overview ... 9 
Pedro Campos, Anand Rao, and Pavel Brazdil 
Part II Agent-Based Models in the Context of COVID19 
3 Epidemiology Modelling ................................................... 51 
Arit Kumar Bishwas and Anand Rao 
4 Agent-Based Behavioral Models: Modeling COVID19 Behavior ..... 77 
Anand Rao and Arit Kumar Bishwas 
5 COVID-19 Epidemiological, Behavioral, and Economic Model ....... 99 
Anand Rao, Sindy Ma, Mark Paich, and Joseph V oyles 
Part III Creating Agent-Based Models of Crisis in Python, and R 
6 MyWealth: A Simple Model of Economic Exchange in Python 
....... 129 
Joaquim Margarido and Pedro Campos 
7 The Ultimatum Game as a Paradigm for Learning Agents: 
A Python 
Adventure........................................................ 147 
Joaquim Margarido and Pedro Campos 
8 Alternative Machine Learning Approaches for an 
Agent-Based Model 
of the Ultimatum Game Using R .................. 189 
Pedro Campos, José Matos, and Joaquim Margarido
xv

--- PAGE 13 ---
xvi Contents
Part IV Case Studies: Agent-Based Learning and Crisis Using R, 
Netlogo, and Julia 
9 An Agent-Based Epidemic Modeling in Julia ........................... 227 
Ali R. Vahdati 
10 Portfolio Management and Crises: A Multi-Armed Bandit 
Appr
oach .................................................................... 251 
Inês Ferreira and Marta Moraes 
11 Organizational Learning from Crises with Machine 
Learning 
and Agent-Based Models ....................................... 269 
Friederike Wall and Pedro Campos 
12 Strategic Alliances in NetLogo: A Flocking Algorithm with 
Reinfor
cement Learning ................................................... 287 
Sónia Teixeira and Pedro Campos 
13 Exploring the Efﬁciency vs. Fairness Behavioural Spectrum 
in Multi-Agent 
Deep Reinforcement Learning .......................... 307 
Margarida Silva, Zafeiris Kokkinogenis, Jeremy Pitt, and Rosaldo 
J. F
. Rossetti 
14 Resilient Agent-Based Networks in the Automotive Industry ......... 341 
Ana Nogueira, Conceição Rocha, and Pedro Campos

--- PAGE 14 ---
Contributors 
Arit Kumar Bishwas PricewaterhouseCoopers, Fremont, CA, USA 
Pavel Brazdil University of Porto, FEP, LIAAD-INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal 
Pedro Campos University of Porto, FEP, LIAAD-INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal 
Inês Ferreira University of Porto, FEP, Porto, Portugal 
Zafeiris Kokkinogenis University of Porto, LIACC, Porto, Portugal 
Sindy Ma PricewaterhouseCoopers, London, London 
Joaquim Margarido ISEP, Porto, Portugal 
José Matos University of Porto, FEP, Porto, Portugal 
Marta Moraes University of Porto, FEP, Porto, Portugal 
Ana Nogueira University of Porto, FEP, Porto, Portugal 
Mark Paich PricewaterhouseCoopers, London, UK 
Jeremy Pitt Imperial College London, London, UK 
Anand Rao Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy, Carnegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
Conceicao Rocha CPES - INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal 
Rosaldo J. F. Rossetti University of Porto, FEUP-DEI, Porto, Portugal 
Margarida Silva University of Porto, FEUP-MIEIC, Porto, Portugal 
Sónia Teixeira University of Porto, LIAAD - INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 
Joseph Voyles PricewaterhouseCoopers, London, UK 
Friederike Wall Department for Management Control and Strategic Management, 
University of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
xvii

--- PAGE 15 ---
Lists of Abbreviations 
AAA Artiﬁcial Adaptive Agents 
ABM Agent-Based Models 
ACE Agent-Based Computational Economics 
ACO Ant Colony Optimization 
ACS Agent-Based Computational Sociology 
AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
ANFIS Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System 
ANN Artiﬁcial Neural Networks 
ASHIA Analytically Solvable Heterogeneous Interacting Agent Models 
AV Autonomous Vehicles 
BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers 
CE Computational Equivalence 
CI Computational Intelligence 
CNN Convolutional Neural Networks 
COVID-19 Coronavirus Disease 2019 
COVID-EBE Coronavirus Disease (Epidemiological, Behavioral, and Economic) 
C-S Cucker and Smale Algorithm 
CV Coefﬁcient of Variation 
DP Dynamic Programming 
DSGE Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Models 
DTN Disruption-Tolerant Networking 
EES Evolutionary Stable Strategy 
ETF Exchange-Traded Fund 
GA Genetic Algorithm 
GABMs Generative Agent-Based Models 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
iGSS Inverse Generative Social Science 
LLM Large Language Model 
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory 
MAB Multi-Armed Bandit 
MADRL Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
xix

--- PAGE 16 ---
xx Lists of Abbreviations
MARL Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 
MAS Multi-Agent Systems 
MC Monte Carlo Methods 
MDP Markov Decision Process 
ML Machine Learning 
NN Neural Networks 
POMDP Partially Observable Markov Decision Process 
PPS Project Portfolio Selection 
PRS Procedural Reasoning System 
PSO Particle Swarm Optimization 
RL Reinforcement Learning 
SARS-CoV-2 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 
SEIRD Susceptible, Exposed, Infected, Recovered, and Dead 
SIR Susceptible-Infected-Recovered 
SCN Supply Chain Network 
SCM Supply Chain Management 
SWF Social Welfare Function 
TD Temporal Difference Method 
UCB Upper Conﬁdence Bounds Algorithm 
VOA Virus Optimization Algorithm

--- PAGE 17 ---
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
Pedro Campos 
We reside in an era marked by continual crises that directly affect the real economy. 
The recent COVID-19 pandemic represented one of the most signiﬁcant challenges 
since World War II. Financial turmoil and continuous conﬂicts highlight the 
world’s instability, prompting questions like: how do we handle such widespread 
uncertainty? Can we still make forecasts amidst this instability?” 
Economics and Management sciences focus on the complex behaviour and inter-
actions of economic agents dealing with production, distribution and consumption 
of goods and services, resource allocation, public policy, strategic management, 
micro and macroeconomics, among others. But because of this complexity, it is 
often difﬁcult to understand how certain effects may result from the combination of 
certain causes. 
The neoclassical approach is not well suited to encompass and explain all the 
complex details of economic life, such as the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 and 
the Great Recession that followed [1]. Joseph Schumpeter, for example, rejected 
the kind of economic thought that mainly favours deductive methods of inquiry. 
Taking into account the evolution of Economics as a science, the need for a deep 
epistemological change has already been pointed out by outstanding economists. 
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models, the standard tool for 
macroeconomic analysis, have been deeply challenged by the Global Financial 
Crisis and the Great Recession. In DSGE models there is no causal link between 
a boom and a bust by construction, except for small self-correcting deviations from 
the deterministic steady state, so the stable period can be understood as separate 
from the unstable period. DSGE models attempt to integrate macroeconomics with 
microeconomics by providing microeconomic foundations for macroeconomics [4]. 
P . Campos (@) 
University of Porto, FEP , LIAAD-INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal 
e-mail: pcampos@fep.up.pt 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025 
P . Campos et al. (eds.), Machine Learning Perspectives of Agent-Based Models, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73354-3_1
1

--- PAGE 18 ---
2 P . Campos
Economy is as a complex system of heterogeneous interacting agents charac-
terised by limited information and bounded rationality. Crises are macroscopic 
phenomena which spontaneously emerge from the web of microscopic interactions 
[1]. Agent Based Models (ABM) are microscale models that use simulation in order 
to 
search for explanatory insights into the collective behaviour of agents obeying 
simple rules. ABM constitute a bottom-up approach that allows us to analyze the 
effect of interactions of agents as a whole. They characterize economic processes 
as dynamical systems of heterogeneous agents, explicitly accounting for agent 
heterogeneity, bounded rationality, and market disequilibrium. These models are 
a promising research tool for understanding the situations and problems emerged 
with the recent crisis. As an example, [1] argue that a Central Bank has to prevent a 
systems’ 
ﬁnancial collapse, or the spreading of a ﬁnancial crisis, rather than looking 
at the “average” risk of bankruptcy using the latter as a measure of the stability 
of the system by means of a network analysis. Therefore, the economy can be 
analyzed in terms of different interacting sub-systems and local intervention can 
be recommended to prevent failures and their spread . The interaction of agents that 
belong to the network structure between ﬁrms and banks can play a signiﬁcant role 
in determining the emergence, the depth and the diffusion of a crises. 
Axtell and Farmer [ 2] have provided an overview of the usefulness of Agent-
Based 
Modeling (ABM) in Economics and Finance. Also Matteo Richiardi [3 ] i n 
the 
Institute for New Economic Thinking employed experimentation and simulation 
with diverse behavioral assumptions, ranging from choice heuristics to learning and 
expectation formation, to establish a solid basis for the modeling assumptions used.
The acknowledgment that a new direction is needed to further study the link 
between 
the causes and effects of crises, and that ABM may provide that link has 
been made by Hamill and Gilbert [4]. Agent based models potentially present a 
w
ay to model the ﬁnancial economy as a complex system, as John Maynard Keynes 
attempted to do, while taking human adaptation and learning into account, as Lucas 
advocated [5]. 
There are many situations where the effects of crises can be handled with 
ABM. 
Flaminio Squazzoni and other authors [ 6], worried by the effects that the 
CO
VID-19 pandemic were causing on the sustainability of the health care systems, 
and threatening an economic meltdown, drew attention to the understanding that 
pandemic requires ﬁne-grained data representing speciﬁc local conditions and the 
social reactions of individuals. They argue that current mainstream research do not 
cover the full behavioural and social complexity of societies under pandemic crisis. 
The insurance industry has been studied by Owadally et al. [ 7], and the authors 
concluded 
that heterogeneity and interaction at a microlevel must be understood 
if cycles and crises are to be managed and prevented. An ABM has been used by 
Garrido et al. [ 8] to understand how propagation of failures in a banking network 
system 
occurs in a very short run analysis. For this purpose, an outside credit shock 
on one of the banks was triggered and the cascade effect of failures was simulated. In 
another work, an ABM has been combined with network analysis by Namatame and 
Chen [9] to shed light on how a failure in a ﬁrm propagates through dynamic credit 
netw
orks and leads to a cascade of bankruptcies. Gallegati and Kirman used Agent-

--- PAGE 19 ---
1 Introduction 3
Based Computational Economics (ACE) and Analytically Solvable Heterogeneous 
Interacting Agent (ASHIA) models based on statistical physics or Markov chains to 
deal with economies in which direct interaction between agents is important [10]. 
The concepts of adaptive learning, and Machine Learning, are drawing inspi-
ration 
from thought leaders like Herbert Simon [11], John Holland [12 ], Melanie 
Mitchell 
[13], Peter Todd [14], and Richard Belew [15 ]. These inﬂuential ﬁgures 
anticipated 
and supported the idea of incorporating learning principles into agent-
based models. However, Machine learning and deep-learning models, with their 
intricate structures, pose challenges in interpretability despite their complexity. 
In the era of Large Language Models, and Generative AI, these can also help 
to program and develop Agent-Based models, and must be used thoughtfully, 
considering the speciﬁc needs and goals of the agent-based modeling process. 
Ethical considerations, transparency, and validation of model outputs remain crucial 
aspects of incorporating language models in complex simulations. 
The book “A Machine Learning perspective of Agent-Based Models— 
Applications 
to Economic Crises and Pandemics, with practical examples in 
Python, R, Netlogo and Julia” uses the ABM paradigm for economic crisis and 
pandemics, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) models are 
used to support description and prediction tasks. ML methods are used to better 
interpret and understand the relation between the parameters of the ABM and the 
results in the simulations [16]. However, interpretability of predictions produced 
by 
ML models is far from straightforward. Deep-learning models in particular are 
enormously complex, often containing hundreds of layers of neurons adding up to 
tens of millions of parameters. Recent advances and concerns have been devoted to 
the interpretability of ML models. 
In addition, ML models are also used by agents to learn during the process of 
interactions 
with other agents and with the environment. Multiple ML methods 
for ABM emulation have been compared by Angione et al. [ 17] to determine 
the 
approaches best-suited to replicating the complex and non-linear behaviour of 
ABMs. 
One of the innovative aspects of this book is the simplicity of how models 
are 
presented to undergraduate students. We use this approach to convey concepts 
and teach how to create models to reproduce some economics and management 
phenomena. 
The Ultimatum game, a game-theoretical approach is described with detail along 
the 
book and, at some point, the effect of learning is introduced. Forms of learning 
such as Reinforcement Learning and other models are considered. At the same 
time, machine learning-based data analysis techniques are also used to handle data 
generated by agent-based models. Also covered are Social Network Analysis and 
Agent Based Models of Network Science. 
We follow the perspective of Learning by Programming, which consists of using 
simple 
programming techniques to build models, such as the Microeconomic Model 
of crisis, or a Virus on a Network Spread Model, that are taught and learned step by 
step throughout the book using several different tools. Python is the main language 
in the book, due to its popularity, but R, NetLogo and Julia are also used. Python

--- PAGE 20 ---
4 P . Campos
has become a very popular programming language in the last few years, especially 
in the area of data science and has been used in very important projects like Google, 
Quora, Y outube, Reddit and Dropbox, to name a few. 
Some packages exist in Python for Agent-Based Modeling, such as Janus for 
Land 
Use and Land Cover Change, and MESA, a modular framework for building, 
analyzing and visualizing the outputs. Furthermore, Python is also very suitable for 
implementing Machine Learning models and some people even argue that Python 
is the most popular language for all Data Scientists. 
The book contains four parts. 
In Part I—Agent-Based Modelling and Machine Learning, we cover the founda-
tional 
concepts of ABM, and the integration of learning and evolution. We introduce 
different perspectives of Machine Learning in ABM, such as the ones of Y oav 
Shoham, Melanie Mitchell, Rosaria Conte, Thomas Brenner, Shu Heng-Chen, and 
Chung-Ching Tai, among others. 
In Part II we explore different applications of ABM in crises, namely, in the 
conte
xt of COVID19: Epidemiology modelling, modelling COVID behaviour, and 
COVID 19 Epidemiological, Behavioral, and Economic Models. We show how 
ABM, traditionally used as an exemplar for ‘disease progression’ was adapted, 
enhanced, and put to the test during the COVID19 pandemic. The interplay between 
the epidemiological factors, consumer behavior and their impact on the economy is 
demonstrated with the help of ABM. 
Part III contains a step-by-step development of a simple economic exchange 
model 
(MyWealth) with a learning component that is created from the scratch in 
Python, simulating simpliﬁed economies, aiding in teaching economic concepts 
and agent-based modeling principles. Another step-by-step implementation of the 
Ultimatum Game is made by setting up a baseline model with proposers using 
either fair or unfair split strategies. A Fictitious Play is introduced, which reduces 
responder rejections, and Reinforcement Learning to reﬁne action policies through 
sequential decisions, culminating in a crisis midway through the iterations. We 
also demonstrate the potential of different types of agent-based learning within the 
Ultimatum Game where agents engage in repeated game iterations, following prede-
ﬁned rules and utilizing Machine Learning to optimize their earnings. Speciﬁcally, 
we implement Fictitious Play, Reinforcement Learning, and decision tree-based 
Classiﬁer systems in R to enable agents to learn from past interactions and apply 
prior knowledge. 
Finally, in Part IV, case studies and extensions exploring dynamic environments 
and 
the use of different tools and languages like Julia for ABM implementation are 
developed. From Industry-Based Resilient Networks in the Automotive Industry, 
to Organizational Learning, Portfolio Management or the study of Fairness in 
trafﬁc Light Control problems using deep learning, and R, JULIA or Netlogo 
implementations.

--- PAGE 21 ---
1 Introduction 5
References 
1. D.D. Gatti, G. Fagiolo, M. Gallegati, M. Richiardi, A. Russo (eds.), Agent-Based Models 
(Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 2018) 
2. R.L. Axtell, J.D. Farmer, Agent-based modeling in economics and ﬁnance: past, present, and 
future. 
INET Oxford Working Papers 2022-10. Institute for New Economic Thinking at the 
Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford (2022) 
3. M. Richiardi, The future of agent-based modelling. Working Paper 2015-W06, Economics 
Group, 
Nufﬁeld College, University of Oxford (2015) 
4. L. Hamill, N. Gilbert, Agent-Based Modelling in Economics (Wiley, Hoboken, 2015) 
5. J.D. Farmer, D. Foley, The economy needs agent-based modelling. Nature 460(7256), 685–686 
(2009) 
6. F. Squazzoni, J.G. Polhill, B. Edmonds, P . Ahrweiler, P . Antosz, G. Scholz, E. Chappin, M. 
Borit, 
H. V erhagen, F. Giardini, N. Gilbert, Computational models that matter during a global 
pandemic outbreak: a call to action. J. Art. Soc. Soc. Simul. 23(2), 10 (2020) 
7. I. Owadally, F. Zhou, D. Wright, The insurance industry as a complex social system: 
competition, 
cycles and crises. J. Artif. Soc. Soc. Simul. 21(4), 1–2 (2018) 
8. P . Garrido, P . Campos, A. Dias, Balance sheet analysis of credit and debt networks. Adv. 
Comple
x Syst. 18(5–6), 1550025 (2015) 
9. A. Namatame, S.H. Chen, Agent-Based Modeling and Network Dynamics (Oxford University 
Press, 
Oxford, 2015) 
10. M. Gallegati, A. Kirman, Reconstructing economics. Complex. Econ. 1(1), 5–31 (2012) 
11. H. Simon, A behavioral model of rational choice. Quart. J. Econ. 1, 99–118 (1955) 
12. J. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems: An Introductory Analysis with 
Applications 
to Biology, Control and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (The MIT Press, Cambridge, 2001) 
13. M. Mitchell, Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking Humans, 1st edn. (Farrar, Strausand, 
Giroux, 
New Y ork, 2019) 
14. P . Todd, The causes and effects of evolutionary simulation in the behavioural sciences, in 
Adaptive 
Individuals in Evolving Populations: Models and Algorithms , ed. by R. Belew, M. 
Mitchell (Santa Fe Institute in the Sciences of Complexity/Addison Wesley, Santa Fe/Boston, 
1996), pp. 211–231 
15. R.K. Belew, M. Mitchell, Adaptive Individuals in Evolving Populations (Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, 
1996) 
16. M. Pereda, J. Santos, J.M. Galan, A brief introduction to the use of machine learning techniques 
in 
the analysis of agent-based models (2015). https://ssrn.com/abstract=2689676. https://doi. 
org/10.2139/ssrn.2689676 
17. C. Angione, E. Silverman, E. Y aneske, Using machine learning as a surrogate model for agent-
based 
simulations. PLoS One 17(2), e0263150 (2022)

--- PAGE 22 ---
Part I 
Agent-Based Modelling and Machine 
Learning

--- PAGE 23 ---
Chapter 2 
Agent-Based Modeling and Learning in 
Economics: An Overview 
Pedro Campos, Anand Rao, and Pavel Brazdil 
The ﬁelds of Agent-Based Modelling (ABM) and Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) have 
attracted the attention of many researchers over the last two or three decades, as they 
model how our society is organised. So, developing such complex systems could 
help us to advance not only the general understanding, but also be used to help 
to guide decisions. In addition, crises have followed one another, from ﬁnancial 
crises to pandemics and wars, with signiﬁcant economic and social impacts. The 
question therefore arises as to how these ABM and MAS can be developed. In 
this chapter we reﬂect on the role of learning, and in particular, machine learning, 
in multi-agent systems (MAS) and also the effects of crises. The study of agent 
learning is addressed in different areas, such as Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and game 
theory, with applications in engineering, economics, and other social sciences. The 
AI literature takes an approach to agent learning that distinguishes it from the game 
theoretic literature. As stated by Shoham et al. [1], commonalities between these 
two ﬁelds are greater than the differences and together with the area of mechanism 
design, and perhaps the computational questions regarding concepts such as the 
Nash equilibrium, multi-agent learning is one of the most fruitful interaction ﬁelds 
between computer science and game theory as we are going to see in this Chapter. 
The structure of the Chapter is the following: Sect. 2 provides an overview of the 
evolution and key concepts in agent-based modeling (ABM) within economics, 
highlighting its role in simulating complex adaptive systems ( 2.1). The discussion 
then moves to the notions of adaptation and learning in multi-agent systems ( 2.2), 
P. Campos (@ ) · P. Brazdil 
University of Porto, FEP, LIAAD-INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal 
e-mail: pcampos@fep.up.pt; pbrazdil@fep.up.pt 
A. Rao 
Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA 
e-mail: 
anandr2@andrew.cmu.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025 
P. Campos et al. (eds.), Machine Learning Perspectives of Agent-Based Models, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73354-3_2
9

--- PAGE 24 ---
10 P. Campos et al.
followed by a review of learning mechanisms inspired by evolutionary dynamics 
(2.3). Section 2.4 explores efforts to integrate cognitive and social dimensions in 
agent-based models. 
Next, major approaches to agent learning are categorized and 
analyzed (2.5). Section 2.6 introduces the intersection between machine learning 
and ABM. 
The emerging role of Large Language Models (LLMs) in agent-based 
research is examined in Sect. 2.7, followed by strategies for integrating LLMs into 
ABM frame
works (2.8). Section 2.9 introduces Generative Agent-Based Models 
(GABMs), a 
novel paradigm blending generative AI and agent-based simulations. 
Finally, Sect. 2.10 offers concluding remarks and ﬁnal considerations regarding 
future research 
directions. 
2.1 Agent-Based Models in Economics 
Agent-based models or modelling (ABM), is a class of computational models 
aiming at studying systems composed of interacting agents and exhibiting emergent 
properties arising from the interactions of the agents that cannot be deduced from the 
properties of the agents themselves [ 2]. These agents engage in varied behaviours 
encoded in 
a set of decision rules that drive their actions in response to behavioural, 
environmental and social change [ 3]. In 1991, John Holland and John Miller 
had already 
addressed the role of Artiﬁcial Adaptive Agents (AAA) in Economic 
Theory [4 ]. The topic of learning in agent-based modelling has been dealt with 
much insistence 
in recent times, due to the need to understand how it is possible 
for agents to develop methods to adapt their behavior to new situations, which 
can be seen as learning mechanisms. In the last decade, multi-agent learning has 
achieved great success in games which were once considered impossible for AI to 
conquer [5]. The formal connection between ABM and machine learning started 
around 1990 
with the rise of topics like reinforcement learning. Stone and Veloso 
[6] deﬁned general multi-agent scenarios from a machine learning perspective and 
presented a 
survey using robotic soccer as an appropriate test-bed for agents. Agent-
based models are particularly appealing for their ability to study the interactions of 
heterogeneous agents, characterized by learning and bounded rationality [7]. Axtell 
[8] supported a close connection between agent computing in the positive social 
sciences and 
distributed computation in computer science. Distributed computation, 
as well as distributed artiﬁcial intelligence involves computations performed by 
distinct software agents. The growing attention devoted to ABM in the study of 
economic phenomena is due, to a great extent, to the inadequacy demonstrated by 
the prevailing theoretical frameworks for economic analysis, during and after the 
global ﬁnancial crisis of 2007–2008 [9].

--- PAGE 25 ---
2A B L 11
2.1.1 Neoclassics, Evolutionary and Crises 
Agent-based Models have been commonly used within the evolutionary economics 
perspective, which provides much more realistic settings than neoclassic economics 
by allowing the consideration of learning agents acting in a context of disequi-
librium and bounded-rationality [9]. Indeed, the analysis of interactions at the 
individual 
level, only, may lead to misunderstandings. Usually, economists assume 
that the market is in equilibrium and that the individual preferences are constant. 
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Models (DSGE) models are standard tools 
for macroeconomic analysis. There are examples where this assumption does not 
hold and the interaction between different levels of analysis is crucial for the real 
understanding of a given situation. Thus, the analysis of mixed levels (individual 
cognitive level and social level) may constitute the answer to some of these 
problems. Indeed, a growing number of leading economists identify the limitations 
of the dominant economic theory as a signiﬁcant aspect of the economic crisis, 
including Paul Krugman, and Joseph Stiglitz, among others [10]. These limitations 
include assumptions 
of rational expectations, representative agents and perfect 
markets. More recently, Polyzos et al. [11 ] studied the effects of the governments 
responses to 
crisis caused by the COVID 19 pandemics, and introduces several 
other ﬁnancial crisis, rare events, and disasters such as World Wars, the Great 
Depression or even the Asian ﬁnancial crisis (late 1990s) and other similar events 
and argues that a framework for measurement of the ﬁnancial consequences of 
such events is necessary. In the context of ﬁnancial crisis, several researchers such 
as [10], [11], [12], and [13], argue that Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium 
Models (DSGE) 
may carry disadvantages in describing complex economic systems. 
Therefore, the use of agent-based modelling and learning is a good ﬁt for crisis-task 
predictions. In neoclassical conception, learning is typically modeled as rational 
adaptation through individual or ﬁctitious play, while more realistic approaches 
draw on AI and behavioral science [14]. In fact, unlike DSGE models, it features a 
bottom-up approach, 
by simulating the behaviour of each individual agent and then 
aggregating the results. In that sense, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Squazzoni 
et al. [ 15] called on the scientiﬁc community to improve the transparency, access, 
and rigour 
of the models. The importance of a model is that if micro-speciﬁcations 
are theoretically plausible, the simulation will become stable and robust against 
simulation parameters. 
2.1.2 Agent-Based Computational Economics 
Multi-Agent Systems are often used to model economies and organizations. Accord-
ing to [ 16], there are several reasons why economies should be modelled by 
MAS: economies 
are complex systems encompassing micro behaviours, interaction 
patterns, and global regularities. The MAS allows a “two-way feedback between

--- PAGE 26 ---
12 P. Campos et al.
microstructure and macro regularities mediated by agent interactions”. Whether 
partial or general in scope, studies of economic systems should consider how 
to handle difﬁcult real-world aspects such as asymmetric information, imperfect 
competition, strategic interaction, collective learning and possibility of multiple 
equilibria. Multi-Agent Systems are a way of “growing economies from the bottom 
up” [17]. The ﬁeld of Agent-Based Computational Economics (ACE) is inspired, 
includes or 
may be complementary to other ﬁelds such as: Experimental Economics, 
Complex Adaptive Systems, Computational Modelling of Social Dynamics, Net-
work Economics, Agent Modelling in Economics and Finance, etc. ACE have been 
assumed as a relevant and promising alternative framework for economic analysis 
and have been extensively used as a “laboratory” for policy design, in addition 
to being widely successful in explaining micro and macro stylized facts [10]. An 
illustrativ
e example of the ambitious steps being taken in the ﬁeld of ACE is the 
development of EURACE, an attempt to construct an agent-based model of the 
European economy [18]. 
In a large part of the studies of ACE, game theory is used. Game theory provides 
us with 
the mathematical tools to understand the possible strategies that utility-
maximizing agents might use when making a choice. It is mostly concerned with 
modeling the decision process of rational humans, a fact that should be kept in mind 
as we consider its applicability to multiagent systems. One of the most important 
aspects in modelling in economics is the way how the system is conceptualized 
and then implemented by the modeller. According to [16 ], the modeller constructs 
a virtual 
economic world populated by various agent types (economic, social, 
biological, physical) and sets the initial world conditions. Next, he/she steps back to 
observe how the virtual world develops over time. The events in this virtual world 
are driven by agent interactions. The key characteristics of an organizational agent, 
the “ﬁrm” agent should contain the following characteristics: 
• Proﬁt-seeking agent with strategic reasoning and learning capability; 
• Proﬁt gains by producing and selling products; 
• Can adjust production and price levels in every trading period; 
• Can also invest proﬁts to expand its production capacity. 
One of most important contributions of ACE to mainstream economic theory is 
that it 
enriches our exploration of economic dynamics [ 19]. It calls our attention 
to the 
fact that the established economic theory may not be robust to learning 
algorithms. In that sense, Shu Heng-Chen [ 19] states that economists are able to 
realize the 
relevance of laboratory experiments (based on game theory, for example), 
psychology, cognitive sciences and neural sciences to economics. In fact, agent-
based simulation can help game theorists ponder on the sensitivity of their analysis 
to various learning schemes and Reinforcement Learning is one of this learning 
types that may be used in ACE. Furthermore, [19] argues that within the area of 
economics itself, 
ACE matches well with experimental economics and behavioral 
economics as models of human agents. It has recently been noticed that models of 
software agents and human agents should not be separate entities. ABM and mostly 
ACE are composed of Agents (usually active objects), Objects (the other elements

--- PAGE 27 ---
2A B L 13
Fig. 2.1 Sample of an agent-based model 
not agents), Relationships (interaction agent-agent and agent-object, that promotes 
communication between the various elements of the model) and Environment—the 
framework where the agents and objects are embedded—see Fig. 2.1. 
According to 
[20], the standard model of economic decision-making, rests on a 
set of 
hypotheses that may be typiﬁed in the following propositions: 
1. Agents are fully informed about the environment; 
2. Agents are consistent, in the sense that between two alternatives they choose the 
best one 
(according to some criterion); 
3. Deciding agents encounter no limit of time and computational power 
2.1.3 Interaction and Cooperation 
Epstein and Axtell [21], in their pioneering work “Growing Artiﬁcial Societies”, 
demonstrated ho
w fundamental collective behaviour can emerge from the interac-
tion of individual agents and between agents and the environment. And an important 
output of interaction is related to learning from others. 
The idea of learning in dynamic environments contrasts with classical non-
cooperativ
e game theory that analyzes how rational players will behave through 
static solution concepts such as the Nash equilibrium. In Nash equilibrium, no 
individual has a unilateral incentive to change his or her behavior [ 22]. Interaction 
is a 
natural process in the real world, resulting from the relationship between an 
individual and the world where he or she lives. For these interactions to happen, 
individuals have to be capable of developing communication (not just transmitting 
information), but more importantly, to provoke some speciﬁc behaviour in others 
[23]. Those interactions may consist, for instance, of attraction, combat, mating, 
communication, trade, 
partnership or rivalry [24]. Cooperation is the primary 
form of 
interaction studied in Multi-Agent Systems, although cooperation usually 
lies outside the Nash equilibrium in simple, one-shot games. Cooperation is a 
mechanism of complex interaction, where agents have to coordinate their actions

--- PAGE 28 ---
14 P. Campos et al.
in the search for synergies that offer advantages of pooled skills [23 ]. The level of 
commitment is lo
w and there is no sharing of goals. 
2.1.4 Generative and Inverse Generative Social Science 
With Growing Artiﬁcial Societies, Epstein and Axtell [ 21] proposed a generative 
program for 
the social sciences. Generative social science is primarily concerned 
with building computational models or simulations that generate social phenomena 
through the interaction of individual agents. Many Agent-Based Models work under 
the generative approach that has been systematised by Joshua Epstein [ 25], in the 
following 
steps: 
1. Situate an initial population of autonomous heterogeneous agents in a relevant 
spatial en
vironment; 
2. Allow them to interact according to simple local rules, and thereby generate—or 
‘grow’—the macroscopic 
regularity from the bottom up [ ... .]. 
In turn, [20] point out that four main issues need to be addressed to build an 
Agent-Based Model,: 
(i) the nature of the agents; (ii) the list of variables describing 
their state; (iii) the list of the actions the agents can perform; (iv) the structure of their 
interaction with other agents. Both these computational approaches working “from 
the bottom-up” allow for a generative research program to be pursued with unprece-
dented scope and vigour. Therefore, those micro-speciﬁcations in question are said 
to satisfy the criterion of ‘generative sufﬁciency’ with regard to the social outcome 
that we are studying. The concept of generative sufﬁciency was approached by 
Medina in 2017 [26], in which the author proposed several conceptual alternatives 
and identiﬁed 
collective challenges that the analytics community should consider to 
remain aligned with its objectives. 
More recently, in 2023, Epstein [27], developed the concept of Inverse Generative 
Science (iGSS) 
where, instead of manually creating fully-formed agents to achieve 
a speciﬁc target, as in the forward problem, iGSS begins with the macro-target 
and evolves micro-agents that produce it. In this process, only basic agent-rule 
components and allowable combinators are speciﬁed. One important aspect of 
this perspective is the link with Fisher’s (1930) Fundamental Theorem of Natural 
Selection [28]: the rate of growth of a population, in terms of ﬁtness, is proportional 
to phenotypic 
variance. By driving up the variance in generative agent phenotypes, 
iGSS can likewise accelerate the evolution of social science. 
Generative social science is a speciﬁc approach within social science with a focus 
on the interactions of individual agents. Emergence, on the other hand, is a broader 
concept that describes the spontaneous formation of complex patterns in various 
complex systems, including but not limited to social systems, and, of course, they 
are connected.

--- PAGE 29 ---
2A B L 15
2.1.5 Individual and Aggregate Levels: Emergence 
Relationships among the elements of ABM are crucial. And communication is the 
basis for interactions within social organization [29 ]; it is expressed as a form of 
interaction in 
which the dynamic relationship between agents is expressed through 
the intermediary of mediators or signals, which once interpreted, will affect the other 
agents. In this scope, the ﬁeld of agent-based organizational simulation (ABOS) has 
been fruitful, as it allows researchers to recreate interactions between individuals 
in an organization or between organizations in a market. See, for example, the 
surveys made by Wall [30] and Gómez-Cruz et al. [29]. Agent-based models in 
org
anizations can also incorporate learning. In 2023, Wall developed a model that 
helps understand the adaptive processes of managers based on experiential learning 
and backward-looking search behavior [ 31]. One important feature of the agents 
is beha
viour. Behaviour characterizes all the properties that the agent manifests 
itself in its environment. Belew and Mitchell [32] describe behaviour, as something 
that “closes 
the loop” between an organism and its environment. We will devote 
some attention to behaviour in the next chapters of this book, as the modelling of 
behaviour is very important in Agent-Based Models. 
Another important aspect of ABM is the individual and aggregate levels of 
analyses. The 
connection between these levels is sometimes referred to as emer-
gence. According to [24], the large-effects of complex locally interacting individuals 
endorse the 
appearance of emergent properties at the level of the population. 
Emergence is maybe one of the hallmarks of complexity in both physical and socioe-
conomic systems. Emergence is the casual relationship between the complexity of 
macro dynamics and the complexity of micro dynamics [33]. Batten [34] addresses 
sev
eral forms of emergent cooperative behaviour, such as those represented by the 
prisoner’s dilemma or the trading agent. In the basis of emergence, there is the 
interaction of individual agents. Techniques that produce such results are known by 
several names including Agent-Based Modelling, bottom-up modelling and artiﬁcial 
social systems [24]. 
The bottom-up approach is widely used in teaching and learning ABM through 
cellular-automata. 
Cellular automata are cells located in a regular grid where the 
behaviour of an individual cell is determined by a set of rules which specify how 
that state depends on the previous state of that cell and the states of its neighbours. 
In the following we will look at some examples of this approach and how they can 
provide us with important insights into real problems. 
2.1.6 The Game of Life 
One of the famous examples of cellular automata is the Conway’s Game of Life 
[35]. The rules in this game are simple: a cell can only survive if there are either 
two 
or three other living cells in its immediate neighbourhood (the eight cells 
surrounding it). If these conditions are not satisﬁed it will die either from the effect

--- PAGE 30 ---
16 P. Campos et al.
of overcrowding (if it has too many living neighbours) or from loneliness (if it has 
too few living neighbours). 
Cellular automata are an idealized version of a complex system [36 ]. Conway 
was 
trying to ﬁnd rules that originated interesting pattern behaviours in the agents. 
And indeed various interesting patterns can emerge in this game. But what is 
emergence and can it be observed here? 
The emerging properties of this model appear when black cells do not actually 
’mov
e’, but the pattern of black squares are seen by an observer as a glider 
travelling across the grid. Besides, other complex patterns spontaneously emerge 
such as, oscillators (patterns that repeat over time), and stable structures (still lifes). 
These behaviors are not explicitly programmed—they emerge purely from the local 
interactions over time. 
Algorithm 1 Conway’s Game of Life 
1: Initialize a 2D grid of cells (each cell is either Alive or Dead) 
2: for each generation do 
3: Create a new empty grid (next state) 
4: for each cell (x, y)
. in the grid do 
5: Count the number of Alive neighbors around (x, y). 
6: if cell (x, y). is Alive then 
7: if Alive neighbors = 2. or = 3. then 
8: Cell (x, y). stays Alive in the new grid 
9: else 
10: Cell (x, y). becomes Dead (underpopulation or overpopulation) 
11: end if 
12: else 
13: if Alive neighbors = 3. then 
14: Cell (x, y). becomes Alive (reproduction) 
15: end if 
16: end if 
17: end for 
18: Replace the current grid with the new grid 
19: end for 2.1.7 Schelling’s Segregation Model 
Another two-dimensional cellular automata popular example of emergence was 
developed by Thomas Schelling in the early 1970s [ 37],1 who was interested in 
studying the macro behaviour that emerged from micro decisions. The Schelling
1 There are several different implementations of the Schelling’s segregation game. See for example: 
Agent-Based Computational Economics, (Leigh Tesfatsion’s page): http://www2.econ.iastate. 
edu/tesfatsi/demos/schelling/schellhp.htm Simulating Complexity: https://simulatingcomplexity.

--- PAGE 97 (SAMPLE) ---
84 A. Rao and A. K. Bishwas
Social and Economic Modeling ABMs have played a central role in modeling 
social and economic systems.
. Economic Modeling: Agent-based computational economics (ACE) studies the 
emergence 
of market level behavior from the complex interaction of individual 
behaviors [44, 45]. It has been used to model real estate, investing [46], asset 
pricing [
47], corporate bond trading [48], automated trading [49, 50], and market 
meltdowns 
[51]. Since the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, interest in modeling ﬁnancial 
markets 
and understanding the stability of ﬁnancial markets has increased [ 51, 
52].
. Social Science: Agent-based computational sociology (ACS) studies the social 
interaction between 
heterogeneous agents. They observe, analyze, and predict the 
emergence of aggregate outcomes from individual behaviors. They have been 
used to understand cooperation and social norms [53], diffusion [54], social 
inﬂuence [
55], culture dynamics [56], ethnic segregation [57], political coalitions 
[58], ecological behavior [59, 60], and collective opinions. 
Business and Organizational Modeling ABMs have been extensively used in a 
variety 
of business applications across a number of functional areas. In addition, 
ABMs have also been used to study organizational behavior.
. Business Modeling: ABMs have been used in strategic management and 
decision making 
[61], marketing [62], distribution, customer experience [ 63], 
research and 
development [64], operations and logistics [65], customer service 
[66], risk [67], ﬁnance [68], and human resource functions [69].
. Organizational Modeling: ABMs have been used to understand organizational 
change, or
ganizational learning [ 70], organizational design [71 ], and organiza-
tional psychology 
[72]. 
We have provided a high-level view of the extensive range of ABM applications 
today. 
A detailed analysis of these are beyond the scope of this book. 
4.3 COVID-19 Modeling 
In early 2020, as COVID-19 continued to race around the world at a frightening 
and ferocious pace—often spreading misinformation along with it—governments, 
organizations and people were clamoring for the truth about safeguards, how we 
can ﬁght back effectively and how long the nightmare will last. To get these 
answers, we needed accurate, comprehensive models. While a number of models 
[73] were produced initially with varying levels of infection rates and death rates 
the constantly 
changing numbers caused a great level of consternation and distrust 
of these models [74 ]. This backlash against the modeling community was based 
on widespread 
mis-perception of how models are built and the role they play in 
such crisis situations. Let’s examine this interplay between models, behaviors, and 
government interventions.

--- PAGE 193 (SAMPLE) ---
7 The Ultimatum Game as a Paradigm for Learning Agents: A Python Adventure 183
ly.append(tmp[ "Net_value" ].sum() / divider) 
# M
ax False 
tmp = no_crisis[no_crisis[ ’Result’] == True] 
# Total results true 
ly.append(tmp[ ’Net_value’].sum() / divider) 
tmp = no_crisis[no_crisis[ ’Result’] == False] 
# Total results false 
ly.append(tmp[ ’Net_value’].sum() / divider)
Listing 7.59 Code in the analyse class 
As we are creating a bar chart the width variable is used to deﬁne the width of 
the bars. 
The variable divider is used to divide the sums to simplify the presentation of the 
chart. In this case we are dividing by 1000. 
The l×. variable is a list that will contain the labels for the bars and the ly variable 
is another list that will contain the values to be represented in the chart. This is done 
by summing the occurrences of the movements with certain characteristics like for 
example: 
tmp = no_crisis[(no_crisis.Epsilon == ’Random’) & 
(no_crisis .Result == True )]
Listing 7.60 Filtering the dataframe into the variable temp 
which ﬁlters all the lines referring to the transactions without crisis and where the 
epsilon is random, and the result is true. 
We use a temporary variable named tmp to create a dataframe with the ﬁlter, then 
we sum the values in the column Net_value and append it to the ly list. In the end, 
the list ly will contain something like [933.7, 945.1, 428.4, 208.5, 1721.5, 479.0] 
(remember that these values are divided by 1000). 
These are the sums of the transactions made without crisis, and now we are going 
to create the list with the values from the transactions in the crisis. This list has the 
name of ly2. 
tmp = crisis[(crisis.Result == True)] 
ly2 = [tmp["Net_value" ].sum() / divider] 
tmp = crisis[(crisis.Result == False)] 
ly2.append (tmp["Net_value" ].sum() / divider )
Listing 7.61 Code from the __init__() method in the analyse class 
We use, again, the temporary variable tmp with the values ﬁltered but this time 
the values are from the epsilon with the value of Crisis which are in the dataframe 
crisis.

--- PAGE 289 (SAMPLE) ---
11 Organizational Learning from Crises with ML/ABM 281
mobility, number and type of sensors, making them unique or at least different from 
the other agents. Two different robots were trained based on cognitive maps made by 
students—although there were numerous differences in knowledge representation— 
to effectively recognize different concepts in their environment, such a hole, a wall 
and an obstacle. Interestingly, the robots tried afterwards to exchange acquired 
knowledge between them, where one of the robots was capable to teach the other 
robot. 
11.4.1.4 Prescriptive Theories 
Prescriptive theories of learning provide guidelines, recommendations, or pre-
scriptions for 
how learning processes should occur to optimize outcomes. These 
theories focus on the design of instructional methods, strategies, and environments 
to facilitate effective learning. Several prescriptive theories of learning have been 
proposed in the ﬁeld of education and instructional design. Prescriptive theories ask 
how agents—people, programs, or otherwise—should learn. Their main focus is not 
on behavioral properties, but on normative theories, in which individual agents are 
self-motivated [27]. 
11.4.2 Systemic Learning: An Integrated Learning Approach 
The performance of a learning model depends on a training dataset, the algorithm 
and the parameters of the algorithm. There are situations where several algorithms 
compete or collaborate for a solution: algorithms learning to learn. This is the case 
of Meta Learning, a subset of machine learning used to improve the results and 
performance of a learning algorithm by changing some aspects of the learning 
algorithm based on experiment results. 
Systemic learning, our proposal for this holistic approach, is built upon the 
ﬁv
e disciplines of the learning organization, as stated by [ 15], and described in 
Table 11.3
. This holistic view helps the cause-and-effect relationships among data 
and people 
and improves individual and collective decision making, by considering 
an integrated learning approach. This integrated approach assumes that learning 
is taking place in a decentralized way and that the various learning agents are 
heterogeneous. These agents act as components of a system that functions as a whole 
and each component may have different functions in the system. Just like in the 
human body, the organs work in an integrated way for a common goal. According 
to Systemic Theory, the whole emerges beyond the existence of the parts and the 
relationships are what give cohesion to the whole system, giving it a character of 
totality or globality, one of the deﬁning characteristics of the system [48]. 
One possible example of Systemic learning is provided by Sun and Naveh [ 43], 
who use 
a cognitively realistic simulation to capture human performance data in a 
radar task. Their model uses Clarion, a project investigating fundamental structures