--- PAGE 1 ---
THE END OF NA TIONAL ECONOMIC CRISIS JUAN CARLOS MORÁN ÁL VAREZ
THE END 
OF NA TIONAL 
ECONOMIC CRISES
JUAN CARLOS MORÁN ÁL VAREZ 
PIRÁMIDE
Economic 
politics  with  the 
ECS-MEC model

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE END 
OF  NA TIONAL 
ECONOMIC  CRISES 
Economic politics 
with the ECS-MEC model

--- PAGE 5 ---
EDICIONES PIRÁMIDE
JUAN CARLOS MORÁN ÁLVAREZ
THE END 
OF NA TIONAL 
ECONOMIC  CRISES
Economic politics 
with the ECS-MEC model

--- PAGE 6 ---
COLLECTION «EMPRESA Y GESTIÓN»
 
 
© Juan Carlos Morán Álvarez, 2025
© First edition. Ediciones Pirámide (Grupo Anaya, S. A.), , 2025
Legal information: piramide_legal@anaya.es
Valentín Beato, 21. 28037 Madrid
Phone: 91 393 89 89
www.edicionespiramide.es
ISBN (digital): 978-84-368-5056-7
 
The total or partial reproduction of this elec -
tronic book, its transmission, its download, 
its decompilation, its computer processing, 
its storage or introduction in any repository 
and recovery system, in any form or by 
any means, whether electronic, mechanical, 
known or to invent, is prohibited without the 
express written permission of the copyright 
holders.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Nadia Calviño 20-09-2021 (adjusted transcript):  «I think we are at a 
time when it is frankly difficult to understand what economic orthodoxy is; in 
a sense the financial crisis broke all the economic paradigms that had been gui-
ding modelling and decisions until then. I think those paradigms disappeared, 
but no new paradigms have emerged to replace them. We have been for ten 
years, [to some extent] sailing with a broken keel and sails set, because there has 
been no economic approach that managed to give an alternative vision of where 
we needed to go.
[What has happened is] an alignment of views at national, European, fi-
nancial institution level that is frankly extraordinary; everyone thinks that the 
green and digital levers are the keys to recovery and, moreover, everyone is tal-
king about sustainable and inclusive recovery. Frankly, fifteen years ago, who 
would have expected the IMF to be saying that we have to be very careful that 
growth is inclusive and that systems must be fair (...) and then the pandemic 
has been the great transformer of ideas  (...)».
(Conference in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Faculty of 
Economics and Business Studies of the University of Seville)
Author’s reply: For more than two decades now, society has been very di-
fferent and requires very different answers, but sometimes we cling to orthodox 
approaches for the sake of convenience. What we need to know is whether the 
current reality of economic politics is open to the approaches of the science spe-
cialized in it, of the normative science, the science that seeks to propose how the 
economy should work, including those disruptive elements that call for an inclu-
sive and fair system, based on trust and individual and collective effort, capable 
of driving continuous forward movement. Economic politics tries to drive, con-
dition, limit or direct certain human behaviours, for example, towards adequate 
rental prices; towards security of supply in essential goods; towards a minimum 

--- PAGE 8 ---
wage level sufficient for life, so adequate that we do not think that other people 
have a much higher income; towards high and continuous training that allows 
us to grow as people and as professionals.... Therein lies the main problem of the 
economic politics maker, that human behaviour knows how to adapt to the situa-
tion, but there is not always the will to do so in the direction intended by econo-
mic politics, and sometimes many cases arise in which, for example, formulas 
appear to charge more, black markets emerge, mechanisms to pay less, little dis-
position to personal effort in learning and/or in teaching... We are simply hu -
man, logically imperfect, so economic policies have to change, but it is difficult to 
perform miracles; it is difficult to promote confidence, movement and effort to -
gether with the population.
* * *
There are facts or phenomena in the functioning of society or in human beha-
viour that are real, that do not admit alternative thinking: “fire burns and gives 
heat”; when an approach ceases to be science and becomes art. It is difficult to 
question them, although science does study the location of mechanisms to avoid 
both effects, the burning and heat in the example, with the design of specific mate-
rials and protocols. 
With respect to any other thought, any of those that I transmit in this work or 
in any other forum, it is an error, my error, the result of the choice between all the 
alternatives that I have been able to analyse; I hope that they are all and that it is a 
complete analysis and I apologise if I miss any aspect in them, but thinking about 
everything at the same time and avoiding ceteris paribus has its complexity. Ha-
ving different alternatives before me, my choice is just that, my mistake, because I 
know there are more alternatives that I have rejected; and as I understand and hope 
that thinking is not unique, there are other possible mistakes; other people might 
make a different choice.
When someone considers that their thinking is correct, it is because they only 
recite or read a message that has sounded so good to them that they decide not to 
think about it, they trap it and turn it into a correct reflection, the result of not 
devoting an iota of reasoning to it and a large dose of intolerance of any alternati-
ve approach. Whoever tries to impose a fact, phenomenon, problem... analysed in 
a partial way, transmits his rightness and can never fail because for these people 
there are no possible alternatives, only imposition and intolerance towards the lack 
of intellectual capacity of those who are unable to accept their “recital”.
The end of national economic crises
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
“The key elements for the functioning of an economic system 
are three, and we as individuals are beginning to turn our backs 
on them. It is essential for our present and future wellbeing to 
empower effort, confidence and movement”.
“Sometimes the forest forces us to ignore the tree 
(governmental vision). Sometimes the tree prevents us from 
seeing that there is a forest (citizen vision)”.

--- PAGE 11 ---
1. Economy with meaning ....................................................................... 13
2. The meaning of economics and economic politics ......................... 21
3. Liquidity and economic growth ......................................................... 33
4. The exercise of intervention and limits to the public sector  ....... 47
5. Territorial perspective of economic politics decisions................... 55
6. Constraints in economic politics making ......................................... 63
1. Ideological repolarisation ............................................................... 63
2. Subjects and individuals  ............................................................... 65
3. Public opinion and interest groups  .............................................. 66
4. The future drives us, it does not limit us ..................................... 68
5. Are there specific vetoes of economic life on government poli-
tics?  ................................................................................................... 69
6. Institutional constraints .................................................................. 70
7. Specific situations ............................................................................ 72
8. Explicit policy decisions can have unexpected economic 
effects  ................................................................................................ 73
9. Debate on conjunctural versus structural politics  ..................... 74
7. On economic politics objectives ......................................................... 77
1. Sustained Economic Growth ......................................................... 77
2. A model of economic growth based on debt as a driver of eco-
nomic recessions  ............................................................................. 79
Index
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
3. Income distribution ......................................................................... 80
4. External balance  .............................................................................. 82
5. Full employment ............................................................................. 83
6. Price stability .................................................................................... 94
8. Conversion from a stabilising monetary politic to a mixed one .. 101
1. The rationale for mixed stabilisation politics  ............................. 101
2. Monetary politics in the Eurosystem ............................................ 116
3. Special features of the Federal Reserve's monetary politics ........ 128
9. Economic development and economic politics ............................... 135
1. Economic development and its model ......................................... 135
2. Specificities and constraints for development politics  ............. 149
ECS-MEC model conclusions .................................................................... 175
Bibliography ................................................................................................. 1 81
Index
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
— So, are we all to blame for everything that happens in the world?
— - Not to blame, just responsable, but of everything. In one way or another, 
every individual action ends up contributing to generating cultural, 
social and economic circumstances that delimit us, in each moment and 
territory, determining the sense of the impacts.
(Elisa López del Amo. Pedagogue)
All of us, the communities we form and the institutions we create, 
are responsible for everything that happens in our environment, for the 
successes and failures, for the extraordinary and the ordinary. Someti -
mes there are hidden intentions in certain behaviours, sometimes mis -
takes due to ignorance, but in many other cases it is simply day-to-day 
life, as it is easier to maintain our way of life than to change it; although 
there is the possibility of controlled designs that bring about change at 
less personal and family cost. Our behaviour has consequences and so -
metimes, no matter how well-intentioned, it has more than undesirable 
effects. Just look at the river full of clothes 1; that flows through Ghana; 
the oceans and their living creatures full of microplastics; the staunch 
defence of stories and their characters from the past, placing them above 
people and coexistence; the sense of ownership learned in childhood 
and taken to extremes as we mature, even over people; the turning of 
tools and utensils into habits that mark people's character; the defence 
of freedom of speech even though there is a directing intention of beha-
1 La Sexta (24 de octubre de 2023).
1
ECONOMY WITH MEANING
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
viour.... In short, this creates a kind of social and economic genetic map 
that needs to be identified in order to plan economic politics.
In this economic determinism there are three essential variables, 
more accentuated in the xxi century: effort, trust and movement, 
although society is beginning to introduce elements of change, increa -
singly limiting their intensity, and thus slowing down the functioning of 
our economic systems. Above all, the protection of 'what is ours' is pro-
moted with exacerbated paternalism, which reduces the capacity for 
effort of the people who are part of the system. An example of this is the 
dilemma that is spreading, especially among the younger generation, 
about the time spent working, which encourages many to give up wor -
king hours even if this means less pay. On a full-time basis, the 40-hour 
working day in country x of the European Union means around 1 in 5 
hours, and only in working ages and provided there is continuous em -
ployment during that working life. Reducing it is undoubtedly a goal to 
be achieved. However, it will first be necessary to make forecasts, in each 
target territory, of the labour needs of the productive and business struc-
ture of our economic system, of the possibilities of attracting a migrant 
population to cover the reduction in the existing labour supply in case 
of need and/or the analysis of the substitution of labour by other tech -
nological alternatives that favour maintaining or improving our quality 
of life despite reducing our effort. Someone or something will have to do 
it on our behalf; if there are growing human needs to be covered, socio-
economic needs must be covered, or else these needs must be reduced or 
covered, which would imply growing dissatisfactions.
It is not possible to demand effort for the promotion and maintenan-
ce of society from those who are under 16 or retired. The rest of the po -
pulation must pull in the same direction, and that is the direction of 
effort. When there are people who demand effort from others in order to 
avoid their own, the situation becomes complicated. The more this effort 
is shared, the better; the more people make an effort, the better the pro -
gress is. For example, if everyone paid their fair share of taxes, we would 
all probably pay less.
Movement is another human quality that is being renounced by leaps 
and bounds, leading to the spread of the phenomena of loneliness to all 
ages, including adolescence, which is taken to extremes with the hikiko-
mori disorder. Remote working is an increasingly widespread phenome-
non in labour relations, which even facilitates international labour mi -
gration without mobility, which promotes the reconciliation of family 
(or personal) life and work, which reduces CO2 emissions, which favours 
The end of national economic crises
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
labour flexibility in exchange for the return of higher productivity le -
vels... But the truth is that the movement of people generates important 
internal dynamics in the system, causing greater dynamics of necessary 
and fortuitous spending, so that if people move, their money does too, 
and the greater the speed, the greater the generation of income, wealth 
and employment. Its absence or reduction reduces business options and 
with it we will have less economic activity. The renunciation of their 
growth is a possibility, but its consequences are not usually pleasant 
when they happen. It is necessary to provoke movement, to get people 
moving, which will lead to more demand and more supply. If people are 
on the move, so is money, and if money is on the move, it means growing 
exchanges, and this generates more income, more wealth and more em -
ployment. 
Personal trust in others and even in oneself seems to be weakening, 
but more importantly it is lacking with respect to the institutions that are 
formed for the achievement of our development model, weakening it 
and its achievement. Moreover, we seem to have turned the promotion 
of intolerance into ideas as well as actions and behaviours. The new 
marketing tools [neuronal and sensitive directionalism, social networks, 
new mechanisms of mass-cheap communication and rapid repetition 
and fake news as techniques of mass manipulation, all this together with 
the lack of time to process and analyse all the information (regardless of 
the amount of training and education received) and the human need to 
belong to groups], have become drivers of a fight, unnecessary in the 
XXI century, between people, between ideas, between rights, between 
beliefs.... Tolerance should be a key element in these times, given that the 
state of science and technology offers human beings a luxurious position 
to find quick and diverse solutions to everything. However, one suc -
cumbs to specific interests that have been able to achieve alignments that 
accept everything that is easy to assimilate as one's own thinking, reject 
without analysis any criticism of it with a simple message of 'falsehoods 
and manipulations' and show a posture of high intolerance to the right 
to think otherwise. And this occurs in all ideologies and beliefs, new and 
old, as well as outside of them.
These three terms defining the ECS-MEC model are more precise in 
setting the intervention than those put forward by Schwab and Malleret 
(2020), although they are linked to them: from speed comes the need for 
movement of social and economic actors; from interdependence comes 
increasing reliance on economic, social and cultural capacities or institu-
tions; and from complexity comes the demand for effort.
Economy with meaning
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
In the face of these changes in people's behaviour, economic politics 
action must seek to ensure increasing satisfaction and avoid or correct 
drifts that only lead to increasing dissatisfaction. Adapting to the chan -
ges that occur sometimes requires great political courage to act and to 
try to anticipate the future. But it is extraordinarily ridiculous to see that, 
every time economic politics tries to do so, it misses the mark so glarin-
gly, and it is easier to follow through than to get it right. It is equally 
grotesque to see how the designers of economic politics always move at 
a pace far removed from that of the evolution of the economy, which 
makes them incapable of adapting to changes in the variables and beha-
viour of economic agents. We know how to do it, but we do not dare to 
change tried and tested actions, albeit under different conditions and 
with different characteristics, instead of adapting to the future, hoping 
that when it becomes the past it will fall on us like a burden.
After seeing how the major central banks talked about the need to 
reset their currency and the lack of capacity to control price stability at 
the end of 2019, we understand that a major change is needed. However, 
the economic variable that is most at fault, one of the basic elements of 
the economy, is the payment formula that determines the exchanges that 
define economic activity. Thus, money becomes one of the great unk -
nowns, since the xxi century is different; we can no longer clearly un -
derstand that money is just another commodity2, which is produced to a 
greater or lesser extent depending on the existing demand, as long as 
this does not lead to excesses in human behaviour that generate price 
instability.
Nor is it easy to realise that when we talk about money, we are not 
only referring to the physical money (currency or paper), but also to its 
capacity to generate liquidity through its accounting treatment and the 
speed with which it circulates from hand to hand, from account to ac -
count. As for digital money, with blockchain technology, it has so far 
been a speculative game, and the moment that official central banks 
such as the European one want to convert their currency into digital, this 
could lead to it becoming a game of control of all human behaviour, lo -
sing the capacity for choice and personal freedom. Not that this is their 
current intention, which is unclear; but it opens the door to such an op -
2 In line with Aristotle and Plato, the former who considered it as a good and the 
latter as a symbol that facilitated exchange, quoted by Riera i Prunera, C. and Blasco-
Martel, Y. (2016, p.10).
The end of national economic crises
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
tion and it is very dangerous: "some melons that are better left unope -
ned".
It is also a great effort for people to think at the same time in two 
different currencies and to perceive all about their effects and conse -
quences, so that we get lost in accepted vagueness, but which prevents 
us from getting to the true meaning of money as a commodity. For exam-
ple, for any country A that accumulates currency from country B, the 
opportunity lies not in its accumulation, but in the ample possibilities of 
obtaining an additional return on that commodity (currency of country 
B), provided that country A uses that currency for safe and profitable 
investments in territories that accept that currency, or in external actions 
that reinforce its future benefits in international economic relations.
For all these reasons, this text responds to the intention of gathering 
key elements that determine the sense of economic politics, from the 
moment it needs to flow until it is executed and has effects, as these 
economic politics strategies were proposed or rectified, since I consider 
that their successful design is a complex task. This task too often takes 
the form of improvisation and of tradition, of doing what has always 
been done; but it is also necessary to consider that failures generate 
much richness in terms of creativity and more and more efforts are being 
made in this sense as well as in terms of complementarity or coordina -
tion of actions, as well as in terms of planning, evaluation, monitoring 
and control. Territorial and temporal singularities exist, so it is essential 
to adapt spatially and temporally to each economic system. 
To believe that an economic system in the xxi century responds to 
theories or economic politics interventions typified throughout past 
eras, very different from our current reality, is a serious mistake. How is 
it possible not to be aware that the change that is taking place is having 
an extraordinary impact on its functioning? What is more, most of the 
negative effects come from the inadequacy of the system; in other words, 
they are due to the fact that the norms and rules that define the functio-
ning of the market remain intact, lacking at least sufficient adaptation to 
each moment and to each territory. If society changes or if it is a different 
one, the model of intervention in the economy will have to be different, 
because the existing rules become incongruent and need to be changed 
or adapted.
It is essential to understand that in economics it is difficult to find 
clear certainties, perhaps because we stopped looking for them a long 
time ago. The different economic variables are conditioned in their evo-
lution by multiple phenomena and events, so that we cannot say that an 
Economy with meaning
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
event will cause a specific evolution in the variable under study. It is 
better to be prudent and argue that the impact goes in a specific direc -
tion, and that the overall effect will depend on many other circumstan -
ces, on the joint action of multiple variables, whose behaviour someti -
mes collides or simply adds and subtracts.
The key aim of this paper is to put an end to the rumour that econo-
mists believe that economic crises, referring to recessions linked to me -
dium-wave economic cycles, are necessary, and that from time to time 
an economic system is subject to this need to take a breath of fresh air in 
order to subsequently boost economic growth again. We have simply 
convinced ourselves that it is necessary because we are unable to reme-
dy it. 
The aim is to show how the economic crises mentioned above hap -
pen because economic systems have a design that guarantees that they 
will occur from time to time, but the obligation lies in how they have 
been designed, which represent the very basis of the system. As long as 
this mechanism is maintained, crises will recur, because it is inconceiva-
ble that economic agents can maintain the rhythm of growing indebted-
ness without consequences in terms of 'expectations'. It will be shown 
how the economic growth model is based on an injection of liquidity, 
necessary, sufficient and growing, and that through the generation of 
new monetary liquidity by the Central Bank (mainly auction or discount 
policies) or the financial system (bank money resulting from the gran -
ting of credit as smoothly as possible) it is guaranteed that the required 
liquidity will grow and guarantee the desired economic growth. In other 
words, it generates a growing indebtedness in economic agents that gua-
rantees that the economy will grow, according to the existing economic 
dynamism. But it cannot be understood that a continuous and growing 
indebtedness does not reach a level every so often that imposes a crite -
rion of prudence and austerity on families, companies and administra -
tions. This is the cause of most economic recessions. It is true that short-
wave recessions are linked to crises in very specific economic activities, 
the result of specific changes in demand or supply in that activity, while 
long-wave recessions respond to major technological changes or revolu-
tions, such as the Industrial Revolution or the emergence of the Informa-
tion and Knowledge Society.
But the economic crises that most concern society respond to a logic 
of growing, continuous indebtedness, when the system does not have 
the capacity to accept not setting limits to it, which is why theories about 
the need to impose austerity continually emerge, especially by ideolo -
The end of national economic crises
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
gies that proposed basing the present and future of our economic growth 
on indebtedness, however irrational it may seem to boost both effects: 
indebtedness and austerity. However, little is presumed to have made 
the former phenomenon a basic element of the economic growth model 
in modern economies. 
It will demonstrate how the need to inject liquidity increasingly is 
essential for the functioning of the economy, how this requires the need 
to generate impulses on the economic dynamism of the system, and how 
there are alternatives to borrowing to do so, without the need to place 
the entire burden of intervention on monetary politics. The new ECS-
MEC model aims for a mixed politics that helps to regulate the liquidity 
of the system in terms of positive effects, bearing in mind inflationary or 
disinflationary demand pressures at all times.
Does this mean that the economic crises of the medium-wave cycles 
will cease to occur? Most probably, if the functioning of the new model 
is properly regulated for 4 or 5 decades, such recessions will cease to 
occur. If they do occur, while society adjusts to the model, their intensity 
would be much lower and the distance between the different crises 
much greater, with a significant lengthening of the expansionary phases. 
The intention, in any case, is to eradicate them for a long time, in the 
hope that the control of indebtedness will be limited to essential and 
prudent requirements, without the aggressive pressure of the financial 
system and the Central Bank. When society changes again, it will be 
necessary to adapt the model to the new situation.
Economy with meaning
19

--- PAGE 21 ---
Determining how to intervene in the economy in order to change 
"what it is" in favour of "what it should be" requires clarifying its con -
cepts. The different definitions of economic science are linked or condi -
tioned by the historical moment and by different schools and doctrines. 
The reality is that there is no widely accepted definition. For many new 
generation economists, economics is everything in society; some go so 
far as to consider that even breathing implies economic activity, while 
others think that a market is necessary for economic activity to exist. 
This led Myrdal to say that the only concept an economist does not need 
to define is that of economic science. 
There are many examples of how fruitful the debate on economics 
has been. Thus, for example, we have Smith, who focuses political eco -
nomy on the achievement of income for families and the State or Repu -
blic, and who seeks abundant income for the former and sufficient inco-
me for the latter. For his part, Mill constructs a homo economicus with 
an aversion to work and a desire to cover his costly desires for goods 
and services, so he sees economics as an abstract science that deduces its 
postulates from the intention of obtaining the maximum amount of 
goods and services, whether necessary or superfluous, with the least 
possible amount of work and physical sacrifice, given the degree of 
knowledge attained. Marx focuses his concept from a scientific perspec-
tive and by means of laws emanating from the production and exchange 
of the material means of subsistence in which man participates. For Je -
vons, economic science studies the conditions that human behaviour 
must satisfy in order to obtain maximum pleasure at minimum cost in 
the form of hardship. Veblen, finally, invites us to a walk through a 
2
THE MEANING OF ECONOMICS  
AND ECONOMIC POLITICS 
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
workshop of repairing structures on the basis of natural rights, utilitaria-
nism and administrative efficiency.
In 1932, Robbins gave one of the most widely used definitions of 
economics, understood as the science that studies the allocation of scarce 
means between alternative uses. However, he studies economic reality 
as it is, not as it should be, so that economics arise at the moment when 
a problem of choice arises, and its purpose is to determine which is the 
best for achieving the end that promotes the analysed behaviour: scarci-
ty, choice and opportunity cost are the key concepts. 
Moreover, this new century is giving the impression that the reality 
is quite different and a change of approach is needed, an alternative 
proposal to the scarcity of resources in macro terms, at a time when hu-
man beings are proving that they are more than capable of covering their 
needs, so that this variable, which is so important in the construction of 
the traditional economic message, is no longer a fact that we should fo -
cus on. References to scarcity often set out examples such as the fo -
llowing:
— Oil. According to OPEC data (Statista, 2023), we will consume in 
2022 the equivalent of 2.27 % of the known reserves for that year, 
which, however, took over consumption and increased their level 
by a further 17.27 billion barrels. In other words, reserves are in -
creasing year by year in addition to consumption, and only in 
2015 and 2020 are there slight drops in the level of reserves; since 
2000, reserves have increased by 43.97% in addition to consump-
tion during those years. This suggests that it may not be so scarce, 
in addition to the growth in reserves, as new and abundant oil 
fields in Mexico, Turkey and Guyana will be added in 2023. Ac -
cording to the data, the planet will be seriously affected if we 
make use of it, unless we speed up the process of eliminating, 
transforming or storing the polluting gases emitted to the planet 
through its consumption.
Moreover, we already know how to “make” oil. Instead of 
waiting hundreds of thousands or millions of years for nature to 
transform all organic matter of plant and animal origin, including 
waste and accumulated residues, into black gold, we already 
have biomass power plants. According to Directive 2003/30/EC, 
biomass is a "biodegradable fraction of waste products and resi -
dues from agriculture, forestry and related industries, as well as 
the biodegradable fraction of industrial and municipal waste". If 
The end of national economic crises
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
we already know how to make oil, in the quantity we need, we 
cannot say that oil is a scarce resource.
In any case, the scarcity would be related to its energetic 
power, which is its main value, and we already know that energy 
is neither created nor destroyed, it is only transformed, and there 
are multiple ways of conducting it towards human use.
— Water is not a scarce commodity, since I don't think we can fit 
any more water on the planet or in the human body, and there 
is a more or less closed system that makes it difficult for existing 
water to disappear. Hence 70% of the planet is still water, an 
amount that has not changed in the last 35,000 years thanks to a 
series of processes that together make up the water cycle. It is 
TABLE 2.1
World evolution of known oil consumption and reserves 
(in billions of barrels)
  Consumption Reservations
2000 27,9805 1.086,65
2005 30,6509 1.201,96
2010 31,6283 1.459,09
2011 31,9017 1.466,59
2012 32,3635 1.479,91
2013 32,8318 1.490,28
2014 33,1102 1.490,51
2015 33,8366 1.489,08
2016 34,5009 1.489,13
2017 35,2137 1.491,33
2018 35,6645 1.493,63
2019 35,7550 1.553,39
2020 32,5357 1.544,23
2021 34,4458 1.547,17
2022 35,5178 1.564,44
Source : OPEP. Statista.
The meaning of economics and economic politics
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
true that almost all of it is salty, but man has already learned to 
make it rain, and through evaporation by heating or using pres -
sure to pass salt water through a salt-retaining membrane (des -
alination) it offers many options for the present and, above all, 
for the future. Moreover, human consumption of salt water is 55 
l/inhabitant/day according to the Pacific Institute (The World's 
Water) and represents an amount below 12% of domestic con -
sumption, while 75% is produced in agriculture, according to 
data cited by the INE (2020).
—  Labour shortages are a thing of the past; they cannot be posed 
given the evolution of the population, the lengthening of life ex -
pectancy and the practically 'infinite' progress in the training of 
people.
— The scarcity of capital is difficult to understand in a well-functio-
ning financial and monetary system that is capable of injecting 
the required liquidity into society at any given moment. The scar-
city of knowledge, or the difficulty of accessing it, is an increasin-
gly weak argument.
—  Food. It seems that Malthus' great concern has been dispelled. 
Today, neither arable land is scarce, as vertical farming (farmscra-
pers) is now possible, nor is production per unit of land, thanks 
to genetic manipulation and controlled production techniques. 
According to Unicef (2020), around 2.8 million children die 
worldwide every year, while around 3 million die from obesity 
and related diseases (Noah Harari, 2017, p. 29). Moreover, in 
2014, according to McKinsey & Company (2020), more than 2.1 
billion people suffered from obesity and 850 million from malnu-
trition.
—  As for coltan and rare lands used for electronics, it seems that 
they are no longer in short supply. Until less than a year ago, 80 
% of the world's reserves were located in the Democratic Repu -
blic of Congo, but new deposits have been found in China, the 
main exploiter, Australia, Brazil, Rwanda, Ethiopia and Burun -
di.... These new discoveries make us think less of its scarcity. 
What is more, human beings have demonstrated their capacity to 
solve any problem of scarcity when it arises.
It is likely that some raw materials are scarce and this poses a pro -
blem; or that the distribution of capital, labour or knowledge is not 
always appropriate; but this does not imply that economic laws are cen-
The end of national economic crises
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
tred on a mere exercise of choice between scarce means, although it is 
true that being efficient and effective will always be more favourable 
than not being efficient and effective. On the other hand, consumption is 
growing and growing and production seems to be adapting to this 
without too many problems. Perhaps the obsession with the importance 
of scarcity is one of the reasons why economics and economists remain 
anchored in the past when it comes to interpreting the future and propo-
sing new strategies or ways of doing economics in situations such as the 
economic recession of recent years.
Throughout this work, economics will be considered as the science 
that tries to establish and delimit the laws that define the behaviour of indivi -
duals, as part of a collectivity, in all those exchanges that are determined by 
means of a monetary consideration, understood as any payment formula deter-
mined by said collectivity1.
The first element to highlight is the individual and his or her collecti-
ves. We must point out that economics as a social science must focus on 
the analysis of people's behaviour as individuals, but also as part of the 
different collectives to which they may belong and in which they are in-
cluded: families; companies; local, regional, national, supranational so -
cieties; trade union or business organisations; different associations... 
As for the motive that induces the individual to form part of a com -
munity, it is the need for exchange, and in our case we are interested in 
those exchanges with economic implications. Let us take the case of 
people who live isolated in the middle of nature, and who may carry out 
some kind of agricultural, livestock, fishing or hunting activity... for sub-
sistence or self-consumption. In this case, no economic activity is impli-
cit, even less so to attract the research effort on the behaviour of this in -
dividual from this point of view. It is only attractive to economic science 
insofar as it comes to participate in some collectivity, even if only occa -
sionally, and this is the case when the objective is exchange with an im-
plicit payment formula. Since it is these exchanges that give rise to an 
economic relationship, economic politics must focus on them. These ex-
changes can be very diverse, depending on the individuals and collecti-
vities involved, since the conditions that are established will arise from 
the position of strength of suppliers and demanders. Thus, we can point 
out different types of exchanges: consumption, production, distribution 
1 For further information, see Moran-Alvarez, J.C. (1998). Política económica, senti -
do y diseño. Seville: Edicion Digital @ tres, S. L.
The meaning of economics and economic politics
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
and trade, capital, knowledge, labour, those resulting from the actions of 
the public sector...
Exchange relationships are not always of an economic nature, 
although they do represent a fairly large part of them. In any case, other 
branches of the social sciences will be in charge of analysing these other 
behaviours, although the need for unity and complexity of reality must 
lead us economists to show generosity in our capacity of vision and go 
beyond the merely economic, if we want to understand and establish 
eminently economic laws, but also human ones.    
The third essential element in economics refers to the fact that ex -
change involves a monetary consideration. This payment formula can 
be very varied, and will depend on the historical moment studied and 
the territorial scope, the economic system of a country and the economic 
model determined by a community, the needs of individuals and the 
restrictions of governments. In any case, this payment formula is mani -
fested in the exchange through a value, which in some cases is called 
price and in others salary, wage, profit, interest, tax rate or representati-
ve value of the barter. Thus, we find various formulas among which we 
can mention: barter, money itself, increasingly complex representations 
of money and other forms of payment such as payment in kind, in wel -
fare (for example, living in places with greater health or educational 
coverage), in security (for example, living in a territory with lower le -
vels of crime, terrorism...), greater access to knowledge (documentation, 
training...), in comfort (tele-work), in greater job stability (civil servants), 
etc.
According to the above argumentation, people individually and in 
aggregation at all levels, as well as the relationships between them, will 
be the object of study by economic politics. Thus, the analysis of beha -
viour around consumption, production, trade, knowledge and capital 
can range from focusing on the individual to looking at the global level, 
and all possible types of collectivities in between. Understanding this 
reality and discovering the laws that govern these individual or collecti-
ve behaviours in the face of exchanges, solving the possible problems 
that arise in the course of these exchanges, identifying alternative paths 
and new formulas for action are the functions of the economic scientist, 
and all this beyond possible contamination by value judgements. It is 
important to bear in mind that some exchange relationships without a 
payment formula do have repercussions on others that do. Thus, for 
example, the existence of voluntary work (free labour action) to care for 
dependent people prevents occupational therapy specialists from being 
The end of national economic crises
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
able to take up a job; food donations to underdeveloped countries can 
lead to the substitution of the local market by this free work...  
We thus speak of there being only one type of economic system, the 
market economy, although at each moment and in each territory it pre -
sents its own singularities linked to the established development model 
and the circumstances that logically condition it. It is possible that alter-
native political systems exist, such as capitalism or communism; as some 
researchers specify, they represent a way of life. From there, only the 
market economy, whether more socialist or more capitalist, is a unique 
economic system. This model is based on continuous economic growth, 
based on increasing exchanges, since each year we can produce and pro-
vide services in the same quantity with less productive resources, espe-
cially employment in terms of hours worked. As long as there are idle 
human resources and the supply of working hours is greater than their 
demand, it is natural for territories to pursue this objective, establishing 
a logical level of sustainability. Moreover, unsatisfied human needs are 
also growing, both in global and individual terms; hence the intention to 
cover them. 
It is true that the maintenance of the environment seems to make it 
advisable to promote de-growth, especially bearing in mind that resour-
ces are limited; but it has already been mentioned that this scarcity is not 
true in global terms, but rather at specific times and in specific territories, 
and that it is normally due to lax economic politics intervention. Moreo-
ver, it is necessary to bear in mind that not all economic growth occurs in 
terms of further environmental degradation or resource consumption. 
Services are growing significantly and represent a very important part of 
the GDP of economies and, for example, the Information and Knowledge 
Society offers many services of a virtual nature with cultural, health, 
educational, leisure, teleworking, etc. services developed at a distance. 
Economic growth does not imply more consumption of non-renewable 
resources or atmospheric pollution. If this happens, it will not be because 
of growth, but because of how we grow and how we behave as indivi -
duals and legal entities. Promoting tourist trips to space must involve a 
higher environmental impact than developing a system of effects (haptic 
technology) that allows real physical sensations to be felt in real time 
while playing a video game, through the sense of touch (technology de-
veloped for example by the company OWO Game). 
***
The meaning of economics and economic politics
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
In an attempt to respond to Nadia Calviño's request at the beginning 
of this paper, an attempt will be made to show new foundations that 
give meaning to the economy and its functioning, as well as the need to 
determine what economic politics should be like and to what extent it 
should and can be adapted to each economic system in time and space, 
taking into account certain determining elements of its functioning. 
Every phenomenon or fact, whether object or subject, is related to 
other phenomena or facts. That is why the scientific process can be ap -
proached from different explanatory planes. Although their capacity to 
offer knowledge is different, in some cases greater than in others, they 
are all valid for their scientific determination and definition. In this sen-
se, it is understood that economic politics plays a determining role in the 
development of an economic system, which is why it is essential to de -
termine how to do so. Thus, economic politics is understood as "the 
science that studies the possible decisions of public intervention in the 
economy, with the intention of changing or maintaining the economic 
reality, in order to achieve pre-established objectives". This implies that 
economic politics analyses the behaviour and attitude of both the mem-
bers of that society towards such intervention and the makers and im -
plementers of that economic politics. It is essential to delimit the deter -
mining elements in a process of economic intervention.
It is true that any applied economic politics is a deliberate action re -
sulting from the decision of politicians based on specific objectives, but 
this does not prevent such action and its individual and collective impli-
cations from being studied from a scientific point of view, either before 
or after it is carried out. This not only does not detract from, but adds to 
the importance of praxis and its prominent role in the theoretical and 
scientific side, for science cannot afford the luxury of rejecting knowled-
ge, however vulgar it may be.
In this way, praxis does not try to capture reality, but to transform it, 
or rather: to avoid change or to change it; in other words, it creates rea -
lity. The theory of economic politics must be scientifically defined, i.e. it 
must be rational, objective, systemic, verifiable, provisional and with its 
own language.
The first of the determining aspects of the meaning of economic po -
litics is, following Timbergen, that it must be understood "as a whole", 
which encompasses the set of measures being implemented at a given 
moment or which are proposed to be adopted at the same time. The unit 
must be recognised beforehand. All this reflects the great difficulty of 
making economic politics with absolute correctness, the impossibility of 
The end of national economic crises
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
avoiding relationships between objectives and multiple impacts of the 
measures that are applied to achieve them. To this must be added the 
difficulty of isolating a concrete situation that is addressed by concrete 
actions, since an event can affect the evolution of an objective in very 
different ways. For example, the depreciation of a currency leads to an 
improvement in the monetary competitiveness of its economy, but this 
does not mean that in reality there is a gain in international competitive-
ness and this reflects an improvement in the trade balance, as this de -
pends on additional variables and circumstances, which may be diffe -
rent depending on the moment and the territory. If we look at Figure 2.1, 
where all the economic politics measures that coexist in a given territory 
and at a given time are grouped together, we can understand the diffi -
culty, especially in the second part of the image. Putting a policy into 
practice in a clean way, without conflict, is complicated.
This contributes to normalising the bad press that economic politi -
cians get, and that is absolutely unfair. If everyone's motto were to de -
fend and fight for the rights of others and expect others to do the same 
for theirs, there would be no need for economic politics (romantic anar-
chism); but this is not often the case, neither much nor little, hence the 
need to intervene in the economy. Making economic politics always 
means making mistakes. It consists of setting a strategy that aims, not 
guarantees, to benefit a collective by helping it to achieve goals, solve 
problems or avoid conflicts, knowing that it will harm others. Therefore, 
as it is an option, compared to others, it will always be a failure, a choice 
compared to other possible options.
The meaning of economics and economic politics
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
HORIZONTAL 
POLITICS
ECONOMIC POLITICS’ 
OBJECTIVES
VERTICAL
POLITICS
Agrarian politics
Turistic politics
Education politics
Industrial politics
Healthcare politics
Employment politics
Pension politics
Economic 
growth
Income 
distribution
Price 
Stability
External 
balance
Full 
employment
Fiscal politics 
and pres.
Monetary 
politics
Financial 
politics
Pricing 
politics
Rent 
politics
Fiscal and 
budgetary pol.
Monetary 
pol.
Financial 
pol.
Price pol.
Rent pol.
Agricultural 
pol.
Tourism pol.
Education pol.
Industrial pol.
Health pol.
Employment pol.
Pension pol.
Economic 
growth
Income 
distribution
Price 
Stability
External 
balance
Full 
employment
VERTICAL
POLITICS
Figure 2.1. Taxonomy of economic politics. (Source : own elaboration.)
The end of national economic crises
30

--- PAGE 47 (SAMPLE) ---
Public sector intervention in the market is usually justified by the 
existence of market failures, so that politics is intended to correct dys -
functionalities in the system, such as the lack of genuine competition, 
which implies that the market sets up barriers to the proper functioning 
of the market economy; the externalities produced by some activities, 
which make it advisable for their costs to be shared with society; there 
are imperfections in time and space, in the functioning of sectors, in in -
ternational relations, in the allocation of resources; the distribution of 
results does not allow for adequate levels of capital accumulation, de -
preciation or purchasing power needed in the economy, so that correcti-
ve or boosting factors have to be introduced, etc. 
In the face of these and other possible market failures, economic po-
litics is necessary. Economic politics is subsidiary to the market, since the 
market does not function perfectly. The state thus acquires the well-
known four functions in its intervention in the economy: stabilisation, 
regulation and control, allocation of resources and redistribution. In 
practice, all economic politics measures have stabilising, allocative, dis-
tributive, regulatory and control impacts; but the intentionality that 
marks an economic politics strategy is that which prioritises one of the 
functions over the others.
In short, all this translates into a series of monetary, fiscal and bud -
getary, exchange rate, direct controls and structural reform policies, 
which, depending on the approach marked by the objective pursued, 
will be closer to one or another function of the state, although in most 
cases, all policies have a multiple effect, allocating resources, distribu -
ting results, stabilising the economic cycle and regulating or controlling 
the economic activity of individuals in the market.
4
THE EXERCISE OF INTERVENTION  
AND LIMITS TO THE PUBLIC SECTOR 
47

--- PAGE 93 (SAMPLE) ---
therefore require a higher time commitment in order to reach acceptable 
income levels.
* * *
Finally, it should be pointed out that one of the problems that most 
concerns a society is its capacity to generate employment, its economic 
dynamism sufficient to meet the existing labour supply up to full emplo-
yment levels. If this is not sufficient, unwanted unemployment is gene -
rated, which will be identified with capacity unemployment, because it 
shows us the greater or lesser capacity of an economy to generate suffi -
cient employment to meet labour supply and demand. Its variation may 
be due to cyclical or structural causes:
1.º Structural reasons. The variation in the number of unemplo -
yed people is linked to certain activities and/or regions, and is 
the result of technological and economic changes, which imply 
an inadequate economic structure, based on difficulties for sec-
toral and geographical mobility, technological or productive 
structure changes, business relocation, company mergers or 
amalgamations, strong migratory attraction of certain geogra -
phical areas, increase in labour factor costs or a strong increase 
in productivity, among many other causes. The unemployment 
generated could be called structural, technological, migratory...
2.º Conjunctural reasons. One of the clear and immediate conse -
quences of going through a recessionary stage of the economic 
cycle is an increase in unemployment, as a consequence of the 
reduction in economic activity (redundancies and a reduction 
in hiring); the beginning of the expansionary phase usually ge-
nerates employment, hence the reduction in unemployment. 
Unemployment caused during a recession is called cyclical 
unemployment; this is the type of unemployment that Keyne -
sians focus on, justifying it on the grounds of insufficient de -
mand, since they consider wages to be rigidly downward.
There are two additional circumstances that generate certain levels of 
unemployment, both of which are compatible with a situation of full em-
ployment, although there may be times when a major problem may arise 
in certain territories.
The first of these refers to  frictional unemployment, which includes 
first-time job seekers or those who have lost or left their job and need a 
new one; given the imperfections of the labour market, this requires a 
more or less long-term commitment. This rate will depend on the degree 
On economic politics objectives
93

--- PAGE 139 (SAMPLE) ---
important to have a historical memory in order to avoid repeating past 
mistakes, and this will partly condition our decisions, but resentment 
prevents us from seeing new perspectives clearly and too often serves to 
justify the absence of a real development strategy adapted to the parti -
cularities of the territory in question. It is with historical memory, but 
not with resentment, that the European Union was built between Ger -
many, France, Italy and other countries involved in the Second World 
War. There is no point in making mental exercises of memory to go back 
to the past instead of establishing future projections that provide a solu-
tion to the problems of nations, of the people who make them up.
All territories have their past, so essential to their citizenship that it 
ends up surrounding them with borders, customs and traditions, reli -
gious confessions, anthems and flags, specific laws, victories and failures 
(in any case, disappointments), particularly beautiful places, "common 
identities that define us", that try to mark a common path of citizen be -
haviour. It is normal to find a lot of all this, that is the thing about history, 
that is very long and increasingly so; and one of the characteristics of 
human subsistence so as not to live in continuous pain is that from the 
past we tend to forget the bad and we keep the good, and the collective 
contributes to this. In every territory there are special, beautiful corners, 
especially when we focus on the people who occupy it, and that is the 
present and the future. To place them behind these "common identities 
that define us" is an excess, but it is also quite common. Living the pre -
sent by looking to the future requires thinking more about people and 
their collectivities, and that implies more effort and trust.
Peace, coexistence and human development often require forgive -
ness. Resentment leaves us stuck in the past instead of looking to the 
future. When an issue generates a lot of controversy in a territory, all 
parties involved benefit from the controversy, but society loses options. 
Forgive in order to move forward, rather than withhold forgiveness in 
order to move backwards and reposition oneself.
Historical memory is a good thing to maintain, it must be understood 
that in the temporal evolution of history some people have been rewar-
ded more than others, in every conflict: in the colonisation of territories, 
in civil, border or world wars, during dictatorships, class or gender do -
mination... Some people have always received compensation for a long 
time in these conflicts, for being on the winning side. It is natural that the 
people or collectives that lost and did not see such recognition demand 
to have a historical memory of these past mistakes; because it has undou-
btedly been recognised as such for a long time afterwards, establishing 
Economic development and economic politics
139