--- PAGE 2 ---
Business Cycles and Economic Crises
Throughout the history of economic thought, interest in business cycles and
economic crises has sometimes been observed to rise during times of crises,
recessions and depressions. However, the treatment of this topic in the literature
has generally been merely anecdotal.
This book presents a bibliometric and econometric analysis of the devel-
opment of business cycle and crises theory and its connection to economic
developments, particularly since the early 20th century . The book explores the
connection between economic development and the literature, utilising system-
atic bibliometric and rigorous econometric methods and drawing its data from
a wide range of sources. This volume provides quantitative answers to ques-
tions which have not previously been subject to a precise and comprehensive
empirical analysis.
This book will be of great interest to historians of economic thought for its
novel treatment of a much-discussed topic, and its well-founded and transparent
results.
Niels Geiger is a postdoc in economics and research assistant at the Depart-
ment of Economics at the University of Hohenheim in Stuttgart, Germany .
V adim Kufenko is a postdoc in economics and a research assistant at the
Department of Economics at the University of Hohenheim, Germany .

--- PAGE 3 ---
Routledge Studies in the History of Economics
205 The Economic Thought of William Petty
Exploring the Colonialist Roots of Economics
Hugh Goodacre
206 Greed in the History of Political Economy
The Role of Self-Interest in Shaping Modern Economics
Rudi V erburg
207 Aristotle’ s Critique of Political Economy
A Contemporary Application
Robert L. Gallagher
208 Otto Neurath and the History of Economics
Michael T urk
209 A Brief Prehistory of the Theory of the Firm
Paul Walker
210 Unproductive Labour in Political Economy
The History of an Idea
Cosimo Perrotta
211 The History of Money and Monetary Arrangements
Insights from the Baltic and North Seas Region
Thomas Marmefelt
212 Business Cycles and Economic Crises
A Bibliometric and Economic History
Niels Geiger and V adim Kufenko
For more information about this series, please visit
www .routledge.com/series/SE0341

--- PAGE 4 ---
Business Cycles and Economic
Crises
A Bibliometric and Economic History
Niels Geiger and V adim Kufenko

--- PAGE 5 ---
First published 2019
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New Y ork, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the T aylor & Francis Group , an informa business
© 2019 Niels Geiger and V adim Kufenko
The right of Niels Geiger and V adim Kufenko to be identiﬁed as authors of
this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78
of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
T rademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without
intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record has been requested for this book
ISBN: 978-1-138-65942-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-62022-0 (ebk)
T ypeset in Bembo
by Sunrise Setting Ltd., Brixham, UK

--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
List of ﬁgures vii
List of tables viii
Preface ix
Afﬁliation and acknowledgements xi
1 Introduction 1
2 Method and data 6
2.1 The overarching research question 6
2.1.1 On “scientometrics” and “bibliometrics” 6
2.1.2 The place of bibliometrics in history of economic
thought research 10
2.1.3 Operationalising the bibliometrics of business cycles and
economic crises 13
2.2 Economic data: measuring business cycles 15
2.2.1 Income per capita 17
2.2.2 Unemployment rate 18
2.2.3 Industrial production 18
2.2.4 Investment 18
2.2.5 Bankruptcies 19
2.2.6 Consumer prices 19
2.2.7 Stock market index 20
2.2.8 Contraction years 20
2.3 Bibliometric data sources 21
2.3.1 EconLit 23
2.3.2 JSTOR 25
2.3.3 Web of Science 29
2.3.4 Scopus 31
2.3.5 Google Scholar 33

--- PAGE 7 ---
vi Contents
2.4 Method and procedure 35
2.4.1 Identiﬁcation of top journals 36
2.4.2 Primary bibliometric time series 38
2.4.2.1 Content analysis 38
2.4.2.2 Citation analysis 43
2.4.3 The potential for and limitations of a semantic analysis 45
2.4.4 Econometric methods 48
3 Empirical results 55
3.1 Descriptive statistics 55
3.1.1 General overview 55
3.1.2 Downswings and term frequencies 59
3.1.2.1 Frequencies inside and outside of contraction years 59
3.1.2.2 Time series of term frequencies 66
3.1.2.3 Graphical comparison of economic and
bibliometric data 77
3.1.3 Economic crises and citation frequencies 78
3.2 Econometric analysis 84
3.2.1 Fractionally co-integrated vector autoregressions 86
3.2.1.1 T erm frequencies anywhere in documents 92
3.2.1.2 T erm frequencies in titles 95
3.2.1.3 Summary and overview 95
3.2.2 Impulse response functions 98
3.3 V alidation and discussion 103
3.3.1 Identiﬁcation of relevant papers 103
3.3.2 Generality of different ﬁndings 106
3.3.2.1 T erm frequencies inside and outside of contraction years 106
3.3.2.2 Economics articles and economics journals 110
3.3.2.3 Magnitudes of measured effects 114
3.3.3 Comparison with ﬁndings from earlier research 115
3.3.3.1 Kufenko and Geiger (2016) 115
3.3.3.2 Besomi (2011) 117
3.3.4 T est power , false positive rates and implications 119
3.3.5 Assessing the effect of changes in underlying citation data 123
4 Conclusion 127
References 133
Index 141

--- PAGE 8 ---
Figures
2.1 Schematic overview of the research question and its
implementation 15
3.1 Time series of JSTOR papers per category , 1855–2012 57
3.2 Relative frequencies of terms anywhere in documents, sE and
dE, 1855–2012 65
3.3 Relative frequencies of central terms, 1855–2012 67
3.4 Relative frequencies of central terms, in titles, 1855–2012 68
3.5 Relative frequencies of central terms, in top journals,
1855–2012 69
3.6 Relative frequencies of the DOWNSWING index,
1855–2012 70
3.7 Relative frequencies of the OVERALL index, 1855–2012 71
3.8 Relative frequencies of the indexes, in top journals,
1855–2012 72
3.9 T erm frequencies in the SSCI records, 1956–2015 73
3.10 T wo examples comparing bibliometric and economic time
series 78
3.11 Citation frequencies, 1956–2015 80
3.12 Cumulative citation distribution functions, 1956–2015 82
3.13 IRFs for CPI vs. BCTC and SPC vs. ‘crisis’ 99
3.14 IRFs for INV vs. ‘depression’ and UNEMP vs. ‘recession’ 100
3.15 Comparison of term frequencies, sE vs. dE, 1855–2012 112
3.16 Comparison of term frequencies, sBE vs. dBE, 1855–2012 113
3.17 Hypothetical and estimated FPRPs 121

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ta b l e s
2.1 Reference list of economic variables 16
2.2 Y ears deﬁned as “contraction years” 22
2.3 Journals in the two top journal categories from JSTOR data 38
2.4 Reference table for bibliometric series 40
3.1 Bibliometric reference numbers, JSTOR, 1855–2012 56
3.2 T erm frequencies, 1855–2012, in % 60
3.3 T erm frequencies, in titles, 1855–2012, in % 62
3.4 Coverage of bibliometric series by economic variables 85
3.5 FCV AR results, sE category 87
3.6 FCV AR results, sBE category 88
3.7 FCV AR results, dE category 89
3.8 FCV AR results, dBE category 90
3.9 FCV AR results, sBE category , titles 91
3.10 Summary of FCV AR results 96
3.11 FCV AR results in line with “panics produce texts” (PPT) 97
3.12 Granger-causality test results for selected pairs 101

--- PAGE 10 ---
Preface
This book is about the economics literature on business cycles and economic
crises, and it is an empirical effort to that end. However, we are neither pre-
senting a new theory of these subjects, nor providing statistical tests of already
available work. Instead, our contribution is to the history of economic thought.
This may seem a bit surprising at ﬁrst – indeed, the most widely used method
for research in the history of economic thought is probably the deep reading of
particular texts and the identiﬁcation of links between them, different authors,
their research interests, etc. This may often be supplemented by delving into
archives or building upon biographical information to get a more comprehen-
sive picture of an author’ s background, and, speciﬁcally , what they may have
meant with one statement or another. What we present in this book instead is
a bibliometric study not of individual contributions, but of a large sample of
economics as a whole to trace the spread and diffusion of discussions of busi-
ness cycles and economic crises over time. In doing so, this book ultimately
has two aims. First and foremost, we present precisely those results just men-
tioned – how the economics literature on business cycles and economic crises
in general, not just as captured by particularly relevant examples (or what were
later deemed to be just that), evolved over time, in relation to actual economic
developments, speciﬁcally observable ﬂuctuations in the shape of business cycles
or economic crises. Secondly , and in doing so, we also wish to strengthen the
case for the relevance of bibliometric research in work on the history of eco-
nomic thought in general. Our results will show , and we will also argue in the
discussion of them, that this is of course no substitute for the traditionally estab-
lished methods, speciﬁcally the close and understanding reading of a particular
contribution. But, indeed, bibliometric methods seem to be a highly promising
complement to this approach, in particular if the history of economic thought
strives to capture and explain both the background and also the broad impact
of individual papers, and the literature at large.
In assembling, processing and statistically analysing metadata like citations
and other bibliometric variables, we have collected and organized a vast array
of information on the quantitative history of business cycles and economic
crises in the economics literature. Despite the generous scope given to us by
our publishers, Routledge, for this book, it is not possible to present every

--- PAGE 11 ---
x Preface
detail in print, and we had to select the most relevant data and ﬁndings to be
documented here. However, insights into the additional data and further results
from our econometric analysis may be arranged upon personal request to the
authors. Since we believe that the data and methods we employed here may be
used further, and in different contexts, we will be happy to discuss these matters
with other researchers interested in a quantitative approach to the history of
economic thought in general.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Afﬁliation and acknowledgements
Niels Geiger is a postdoc in economics and research associate at the Institute of
Economics (520H) at the Univ ersity of Hohenheim in Stuttgart, Germany . He
received his doctorate in economics in February 2015 with a thesis on com-
bining behavioural economics with business cycle theory . His current research
interests mainly cover business cycle theory and behavioural economics, and
especially the history of thought in both subjects. Part of the work on this
book was conducted while he enjoyed the warm and welcoming atmosphere
at the Academy of Finland Centre of Excellence in the Philosophy of the
Social Sciences (TINT), University of Helsinki, Finland, during spring of 2016.
V adim Kufenko received his doctora te in economics in 2017 at the Univer-
sity of Hohenheim and is currently a postdoctoral research associate and a
research area coordinator at the In stitute of Economics (520H) at the Uni-
versity of Hohenheim. His main research interests include the econometric
analysis of time-series and panel data, scientometrics and the analysis of sen-
timents, inequality , political economy and economic history , with a focus on
institutions and demographics.
The authors began their joint work in late 2013 with a paper on the “stylized
facts” of business cycles, which was recently published in the Journal of Business
Cycle Research (Kufenko and Geiger 2017). In late 2014, the authors started to
work on the connection between business cycles in the economy and economic
research on business cycles, and thus prepared a paper on “Business Cycles
in the Economy and in Economics: An Econometric Analysis” for the 2015
Conference of the European Society for the History of Economic Thought in
Rome. The paper was published in Scientometrics in early 2016 (Kufenko and
Geiger 2016). It soon became obvious that this highly interesting and intriguing
research area provides many more questions and many more potential answers
than could be ﬁtted into just one single paper, so the authors decided to make
it their main research project and expand on the original results documented in
the paper in various ways. Emily Kindleysides of Routledge was kind enough
to offer the ideal frame for such a publication, by offering the authors a book
contract for a monograph in Routledge’ s series on the history of economic
thought. During the process of writing and producing this book, we were
in regular exchange with Laura Johnson, Lisa Lavelle and Anna Cuthbert of

--- PAGE 13 ---
xii Afﬁliation and acknowledgements
Routledge, who were always helpful – and, in particular, very considerate and
understanding of our requests regarding the completion of this book.
The bibliometric data in this book primarily come from two sources. The
ﬁrst is JSTOR’ s “Data for Research” portal. (Copyright JSTOR 2016–2017.
All rights reserved.) While Niels Geiger visited the University of Helsinki,
citation data were accessed from the second source, Clarivate Analytics W eb
of Science
TM. (Copyright Clarivate Analytics 2016. All rights reserved.) More
detailed records of which data were used are documented in the respective
chapters and sections, and are available from the authors upon request. The
inclusion of long-memory effects into the time-series analysis is a merit of at
least several generations of econometricians. In particular, however, we would
like to thank Morten Ørregaard Nielsen and Michal Ksawery Popiel for the
FCV AR software package implemented in Matlab. T o our knowledge, our
work was one of the ﬁrst applications of this type of analysis to bibliometric
series.
Naturally , a book such as this one owes its completion to more than the input
of the two authors. W e are particularly grateful to Johannes Schwarzer for his
various comments and feedback throughout the process of working on this
book, as well as for his careful proofreading of drafts. W e would also like to
thank Mattis Geiger for the discussions we had on statistical power tests, specif-
ically their relevance and especially their interpretation in the context of our
econometric set-up. Our original discussion of the research question has ben-
eﬁted from comments by Pedro Garcia Duarte and Harald Hagemann. All
remaining errors are, of course, our own.

--- PAGE 14 ---
1 Introduction
Following the 2007–08 ﬁnancial and ec onomic crisis, even casual observers
of economics could have gained the impression that many more authors than
before suddenly referred to John Maynard Keynes’ s writings, particularly the
General Theory (Keynes 1936). Maybe most evidently , for example, Robert
Skidelsky (2009) proclaimed Keynes: The Return of the Master .A g a i n s tt h eb a c k -
ground of the severe economic crisis and subsequent contraction, Skidelsky
argued, it was in the writings of Keynes that economists would ﬁnd answers
to the present problems. Indeed, it seemed not just to Skidelsky , but to many
economists, that the economic downswing called for a discussion of that
approach to understanding the severe contraction. A similar context is apparent
when going back in time to the General Theory’ s original publication. It is evi-
dent that this original work itself was written against the very background of
severe economic crisis and depression. Even though the direct inﬂuence of the
Great Depression on Keynes (1936) is debatable (see Caspari 2008: 170), the
economic turmoil arguably contributed to why Keynes’ s work seemed so rele-
vant and quickly gained such attrac tion (see Johns on 1971: 3f.). What is more,
Keynes’s General Theory is by no means the only example of a major work on
ﬂuctuations and crises that is frequently set and seen in its historical context of
a large economic contraction. Indeed, while the Great Depression was still near
its trough, Irving Fisher had written and published a book inﬂuenced by his
own ﬁrst-hand experience (see Blaug 1986: 80f.; Dimand 1994) with the dev-
astating effects of the stock market crash and deﬂation in Booms and Depressions
(Fisher 1932).
These prominent examples highlight how economic downturns can inspire
works on those events, i.e. contributions to business cycle and economic crises
theory (BCCT) or related empirical work. Similar anecdotal evidence can eas-
ily be gathered for trends in the opposite direction. During the economically
prosperous times of the post-war decades, a prime example is Bronfenbrenner’ s
(1969) edited volume, which raises the eponymous question Is the Business Cycle
Obsolete? as the book’ s title. Despite the volume’ s emphasis on high (not nec-
essarily steady) growth rates (e.g. see Allsopp 1971), interest in BCCT seemed
to have decreased in the 1960s, with growth theory in particular taking cen-
tre stage instead. Similarly , having experienced long expansionary phases and

--- PAGE 15 ---
2 Introduction
relatively mild recessions during the 1980s and 1990s, authors such as W alsh
(1999) referenced Bronfenbrenner (1969) in posing the same question (also see
Romer 1999). Maybe the most iconic recent example of positive economic
developments decreasing interest in BCCT can be found in Lucas (2003: 1),
who likewise argued, based on the experience of the previous years of the
“Great Moderation” and shortly before the onset of the “Great Recession”,
that “the central problem of depression prevention has been solved”.
While this is a relatively varied list of anecdotal evidence, the above examples
still suggest a coherent interpretation. Could it be that it is not just the economy
which goes through cycles over the course of its development, but that the
discussion of said business cycles – particularly of its most dramatic points and
phases, namely crises and contractions – follows a similar cyclical pattern of
ﬂuctuations in interest and prevalence? What is more, could this pattern even be
linked to the economic developments, following and trailing the latter, in the
sense that economic downturns precipitate increased interest in the discussion
of business cycles and economic crises, while recoveries and upswings have an
adverse effect? This would imply a much more speciﬁc and peculiar cyclicality
in economic thought than was discussed elsewhere, for example by Neumark
(1975: 257f.) or Kurz (2006), who pointed at the idea of old economic ideas
resurfacing many decades later, not necessarily connected to actual economic
developments.
1
As it turns out, the notion of a potential link between economic ﬂuctu-
ations and the corresponding literature is almost as old as BCCT itself. In a
theoretical work on economic ﬂuctu ations, John Mills (1868: 11) noted that
“every commercial crisis occurring in this country is promptly followed by a
literature of pamphlets”. Similar observations pointing out the large amount of
publications following each economic crisis were made, for example, by Aftal-
ion (1913: 289f.) and Richt er (1923: 153). Realizing the same phenomenon,
other authors such as Durbin (1933: 17) warned readers against texts origi-
nating in these circumstances, as they might attract relevance not by virtue
of their respectability , but because of the (historical) context in which they
are published. Looking back at the Great Depression and subsequent years,
Bronfenbrenner (1966: 542ff. ) described the increased discussion of economic
ﬂuctuations as a fad (despite using the term “cycle”; this argument is therefore
closer to those of Neumark (1975) and Kurz (2006) referenced above). Overall,
observations of economic developments affecting the literature are not limited
to BCCT in a more strict sense (i.e. focused on cyclical ﬂuctuations) either. In
his History of Economic Analysis , Schumpeter (1954: 1172) ﬁnds that “[i]n any
prolonged period of economic malaise economists, falling in like other peo-
ple with the humors of their time, proffer theories that pretend to show that
depression has come to stay . ” Nor is the suggested effect limited to the academic
literature, as Fabian (1989: 127f.) shows by tracing the inﬂuence that the 1837
and 1857 downswings in the United States had on attempted explanations and
discussions outside of academia and economics experts. There, economic crises
became a matter of reﬂection not just by all kinds of pundits, but also as widely

--- PAGE 16 ---
Introduction 3
as in poetry or jokes of the time. Fabian (1989: 127) further argues that these
non-economic writers frequently and explicitly acknowledged that it was the
“panics” which had made them write their texts. What is more, even within
the academic literature, contractions may cause not just increased research in
BCCT and related empirical work, but also more casual discussions of busi-
ness cycles and economic crises. Overall, therefore, an intriguing argument
can be made for the hypothesis and story that “panics produce texts” (Fabian
1989: 128), and, more generally for the ac ademic economics literature on busi-
ness cycles and economic crises, that downswings in economic activity cause an
increase in publications and in the reception of literature on business cycles and
economic crises, while upswings conversely tend to have the opposite effect.
On the one hand, this argument of the economics literature reacting to busi-
ness cycles and economic crises is intuitively very appealing. On the other
hand, however, there is something strange about the “panics produce texts”
story indeed. If economists realized the recurrence of business cycles and eco-
nomic crises, and if those constitute a phenomenon worth explaining – or even
one that is considered essential for a complete analysis of capitalist economies,
as for example Schumpeter (1939: v) argued (similarly , also see B ¨ohm-Bawerk
1898: 132; Mitchell 1951: vii) – should that phenomenon not be discussed
regardless of the phase of the cycle the economy is currently in? Indeed, follow-
ing this logic, the academic literature – unlike media such as, especially , news
outlets – should be expected to be fairly independent of recent salient events.
In other words, searching for answers on what causes, and how to devise poli-
cies to deal with, crises is not just relevant – albeit arguably more pressing – in
a contraction period. Therefore, if economists strive for a better understanding
of aggregate economic ﬂuctuations, they should not stop deliberating on busi-
ness cycles and economic crises just because the previous year was prosperous.
This may be very much in line with what newspapers are supposed to do – i.e.
report on the events – but less so with what is expected from academics try-
ing to fundamentally comprehend underlying phenomena. However, even if
much BCCT research in the strict sense was not subject to such ﬂuctuations,
economics as a whole might still display a corresponding reaction if economic
downturns fuel more general writings on and superﬁcial references to these
(also note Durbin 1933: 17).
Therefore, despite the intuitive appeal of the “panics produce texts” hypoth-
esis, and even when taking all the above-mentioned anecdotal examples into
account, it can be said that, ex ante , it is not completely evident whether the
economics literature as a whole, and speciﬁcally BCCT , reacts to business cycles
and economic crises. T o gain a better understanding of whether or not there
really is a corresponding relation between economic data and the economics
literature, reference to anecdotal examples needs to be extended by an empir-
ical analysis that considers more than individual historical contractions such as
the Great Depression and seminal works such as Keynes’ s (1936)General Theory.
A ﬁrst contribution in this direction was made by Besomi (2011), who traced
frequencies of particular terms relevant in the context of BCCT in the titles of

--- PAGE 17 ---
4 Introduction
economics publications between 1815 and 2009. Based on a descriptive analysis
directly comparing absolute frequencies inside and outside of (respectively , close
to and far from) contraction years, Besomi (2011: 56) corroborates the “pan-
ics produce texts” hypothesis. A more in-depth, econometric analysis which
picked up Besomi’ s work was subsequently provided by Kufenko and Geiger
(2016). Measuring relative frequencies of Besomi’ s terms in the full texts of eco-
nomics articles archived on JSTOR, the authors argue that their results may be
read to conﬁrm the original hypothesis, but also point to caution in interpret-
ing the ﬁndings and highlight the necessity of further research such as a more
comprehensive statistical approach (see Kufenko and Geiger 2016: 57f.). This is
precisely what the present book will do, namely , extend earlier empirical work
(in particular that of Besomi (2011) and Kufenko and Geiger (2016)), and espe-
cially provide a more comprehensive and in-depth discussion of the results and
their potential implications. The guiding research question is whether or not
economic ﬂuctuations have a clearly identiﬁable, robust effect on the economics
literature on business cycles and economic crises, and the book is devoted to
investigating, analysing and discussing this question.
T o achieve this end, the argument and analysis in this book is structured as
follows. Chapter 2 provides a comprehensive overview of the data used and
methods applied, and especially of how the “panics produce texts” hypothesis
can be operationalized and linked to the data. This includes a general illustration
of the relevant sources and tools of bibliometrics and scientometrics, which
are presented in some additional detail for the reader who may not yet be
familiar with these approaches. All aspects of the methods and data, whether
they are related to how the data were accessed, compiled and analysed with
econometric methods, are laid out in Chapter 2. This is in order to allow
Chapter 3 to fully focus on the presentation and discussion of the empirical
ﬁndings. Results on the “panics produce texts” hypothesis, i.e. the potential
effect of economic ﬂuctuations on the academic literature on business cycles
and economic crises, are presented in a descriptive manner with ﬁgures and
corresponding conjectures in Section 3.1, as well as in the rigorous econometric
analysis supplemented by various illustrative tables in Section 3.2.
In the descriptive part of the results, there are several interesting ﬁndings in
line with earlier observations in the literature that had not built on a similar
empirical record. In th e 1930s, around 40% and in some years nearly 50% of all
economics articles, and well over 30% of all articles in economics journals, con-
tained the term ‘depression’, which appeared much more frequently then than
during any other historical episode. In the following decades, ‘depression’ came
to be used less and less, and even more rarely than ‘recession’ since the 1970s.
Between the 1920s and the 2010s, in line with the question raised by Bron-
fenbrenner (1969), 1970 marks the year with the lowest frequency of papers
featuring the terms “business cycle” or “trade cycle”,
2 in both economics jour-
nals and economics articles, as well as in the broader categories of business
and economics, which include neighbouring disciplines such as ﬁnance. Over-
all, however, the descriptive results pro vide no generally conclusive evidence.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction 5
As regards statistical associations between economic and bibliometric variables,
there are a select few robust ﬁndings. Concerning articles on economics and
neighbouring subjects, changes in the US consumption price index were con-
sistently found to affect changes in the frequency of papers containing the terms
‘crisis’, ‘recession’, ‘glut’ and ‘stagnation’. In the same categories, variations in
the frequency of papers in which either of the terms “business cycle” or “trade
cycle” appeared were found to be affected by changes in investment activity
in the United States. Several impulse response functions further indicate effects
of non-negligible magnitude and in the expected direction of increased discus-
sions following a downturn. This implies that, at least for these combinations,
there may be a “panics produce texts” effect in the literature. However, there is
a remarkable lack of more general robust positive evidence from the statistical
analysis, especially in bibliometric time series for economics journals.
Aiming at a validation of these and the many other ﬁndings, Section 3.3
provides a detailed discussion of various issues relating to the data itself, the
operationalization of the research question, and the potential interpretations
possible from the results. Chapter 4 then concludes with a summary which
argues that, despite compelling anecdotal evidence and positive ﬁndings from
earlier related research, as well as some individual examples like those men-
tioned in the previous paragraph, in light of the various caveats raised in the
discussion and the overall weak evidence for a systematic, robust effect of eco-
nomics on bibliometric variables, the “panics produce texts” hypothesis cannot
be conﬁrmed as a general rule for the academic economics literature at large,
and especially not for the academic literature published in economics journals.
Notes
1 The resurgence in popularity of Keynes’ s works in the context of the Great Recession may
be seen as an instance of both: a revival in popularity of old ideas decades after their orig-
inal publication, and greater interest in BCCT fuelled by recent economic developments.
2 Throughout this book, the terms of interest are usually put in single quotes when they
are referenced in the text. This is in order to highlight that a bibliometric variable with
potentially various corresponding strings is concerned. However, when the text refers to
speciﬁc search strings, which were used for compiling the bibliometric series, those are
put in double quotes. See Subsection 2.4.2 for a full overview of the notation.

--- PAGE 19 ---
2 Method and data
This chapter presents our research strategy in detail. T o provide some context
ﬁrst, Section 2.1 operationalizes the research question against the background
of a short summary of the history of scientometrics and bibliometrics, specif-
ically concerning its applications to economics, respectively the history of
economic thought (HET). Empirically assessing the “panics produce texts”
(PPT) hypothesis requires both economic data (presented in Section 2.2) and
bibliometric records (documented in Section 2.3). Section 2.4 then concludes
the chapter by listing how and in what way we process and arrange the data,
including the econometric methods. Results are presented in the following
Chapter 3.
2.1 The overarching research question
In order to quantitatively answer the question of how economic ﬂuctuations
affect the academic literature in economics, we use bibliometric, respectively
scientometric, data and methods. Since neither are, as of yet, standard tools in
research on the HET , it is worthwhile to include a short overview of what
these two ﬁelds cover, and how and where their methods and corresponding
data have already been employed in research on the HET . Subsections 2.1.1
and 2.1.2 do just that, before Subsection 2.1.3 returns to focus on the issue at
hand, i.e. the operationalization of the PPT story as a research question.
2.1.1 On “scientometrics” and “bibliometrics”
Scientometrics is the scientiﬁc observation and analysis of science itself by
means of quantitative methods. This pertains to both the history and present
state of science. One of the major tools employed in this endeavour is
bibliometrics, i.e. the statistical analysis of written publications, including
both their actual text content and their metadata, most importantly cita-
tions and references between items.
1 Non-bibliometric measures which feature
in scientometric research may include data on the number of scientists, the
volumes of research grants, etc. In comparison with the sociology of science
(e.g. Merton 1968, 1988), scientometrics generally focuses on publications,

--- PAGE 20 ---
Method and data 7
whereas the former is more interested in the behaviour of scientists – see
Leydesdorff and Milojevi ´c (2015); but also note Merton’ s (1979) foreword
in Garﬁeld (1979). The analysis in this book tackles a scientometric research
question by means of bibliometric and econometric tools.
The origin of scientometrics and bibliometrics as dedicated scientiﬁc efforts
dates back to Eugene Garﬁeld’ s (1955) paper on “Citation Indexes for Science”.
Garﬁeld’ s early work led to the creation of the Science Citation Index (SCI),
ofﬁcially launched in 1964 and originally arranged and published by the Insti-
tute for Scientiﬁc Information, and now accessible via the W eb of Science.
2 It is
still one of the primary , most reliable and most commonly used sources for cita-
tion data today – see Hamermesh (2015: 3); also Section 2.3. Next to Eugene
Garﬁeld, another prominent founding father was Derek J. de Solla Price (e.g.
Price 1963). In 1978, fuelled by the rise of computers and the thereby increas-
ingly possible effective analysis of the vast arrays of data which scientometrics
deals with, the dedicated journal wearing the discipline’ s name, Scientometrics,
was established (see Price 1978). T oday , additional periodicals such as the Jour-
nal of Informetrics focus on scientometrics as well. The tools of bibliometrics
are of course not exclusively used in scientometrics, but particularly feature as
a staple in library and information science. Furthermore, they have recently
been applied to an even broader ﬁeld: Michel et al. (2011) trace trends in
English book literature (including non-academic works) by means of biblio-
metric methods to quantitatively analyse developments outside of science under
the label of “culturomics”.
At present, scientometrics constitutes an empirical approach used to quanti-
tatively assemble trends, changes and developments in science in order to gain a
more detailed picture of the history and state of science (see e.g. Leydesdorff and
Milojevi´c 2015). This also includes such general topics of interest as the iden-
tiﬁcation of thematic structures and research ﬁelds like “economics” through
bibliometric methods – see e.g. Gl ¨aser et al. (2017) for a recent review of
that literature. Furthermore, scientometric indicators are broadly used to com-
pare research ﬁelds, universities, faculties, journals and individual researchers –
whether in ranking comparisons (e.g. the Shanghai “Academic Ranking of
W orld Universities”), hiring decisions or other related issues. The two most
prominent measures employed in this context are the “impact factor” (IF) and
the “ h-index”. Both are simple index numbers which do convey some infor-
mation, but should also be interpreted with care, as much of the discussion
within the scientometric literature itself shows – for example, see Zuckerman
(1987) on the advantages and shortcomings of citation data; also see Alberts
(2013) and Gagolewski (2013) for more recent discussions of the limitations of
simple indicators.
The IF , mostly encountered as a journal IF and regularly provided not only
in bibliometric databases, but on publishers’ own websites, is a measure which
relates citations that a body of literature received to the number of citable items
in that body (see Garﬁeld 1972). In the standard form that is often documented,
for example for journals, the IF for a given year t is the number of citations

--- PAGE 21 ---
8 Method and data
received in year t by articles published in that journal during the two preced-
ing years t − 1a n d t − 2, divided by the total number of articles published in
that journal in years t − 1a n d t − 2. That is, a journal’ s 2015 IF is the num-
ber of 2015 citations to 2014 and 2013 articles in that journal, divided by the
number of 2014 and 2013 articles published in the journal’ s respective issues
(or, more generally , citable items instead of articles). Of course, other, similar
numbers can be constructed just as easily , e.g. by using a ﬁve-year IF , etc. This
measure is simple and straightforward, and provides a very general impression of
the reach and impact of a body of literature (e.g. a journal’ s issues within some
time period). However, there are a number of apparent problems once more
than a superﬁcial impression is to be gained from the index. These apply even if
all relevant citations could be observed without any error, bias or other short-
comings, i.e. even if it was certain that empirically measured citation counts
reﬂect actual citation counts (and, what is more, that these accurately reﬂect
intellectual inﬂuence).
The major caveat which can be raised about IFs is that they are averages
which do not capture either any other aspects of the distribution they
are describing or differences in underlying determinants. For example, dif-
ferent disciplines – and even subdisciplines within the same general research
ﬁelds such as economics – often have vastly different citation practices (see e.g.
Kaur et al. 2013). If, in one discipline, there was a higher frequency of co-
authorship and a generally higher average citation or reference count per paper
(as is usually the case when comparing natural sciences with social sciences),
IFs in that discipline – whether for journals or authors – will tend to be higher
than in the other, which does not really say much about a journal’ s or author’ s
impact within their relevant area or peer group.
3 This matters, of course,
when university hiring decisions are based on IFs, and candidates from dif-
ferent disciplines – or even just subdisciplines, e.g. from macroeconomics and
industrial economics – apply for the same position. Furthermore, differences
between disciplines also feature in publication lags, which additionally affects
IFs, depending on how they are calculated. For example, due to the short-
term view captured by the standard two-year form of IFs, economics journals
tend to have lower IFs than those in the natural sciences (see Hamermesh
2015: 27), in part because lags between acceptance and publication are often
much shorter in the latter – as opposed to the 18 months between submission
and publication which are common in economics (see Bj ¨ork and Solomon
2013). Therefore, unless a paper is written and submitted very soon after a
publication it cites, it will not affect the latter author’ s or publication’ s IF .
Citation patterns, however, differ not only between subdisciplines, but
also indeed within them. This is best illustrated by differences in IFs of a
(sub)discipline’ s journals, where the majority of papers in lower-ranked jour-
nals are cited just as (in)frequently as those in higher-ranked journals, but the
higher-ranked journals (by IF) often feature a few extraordinarily frequently
referenced items. As Hamermesh (2015: 26) notes, “[t]he main reason that a
few economics journals are ranked more highly than all others is that a very

--- PAGE 22 ---
Method and data 9
few papers in these journals generate immensely more citations than other
papers published in those journals or elsewhere. A very few outliers determine
our perceptions of journal quality , a perception that ignores the tremendous
heterogeneity of articles within and across journals. ” This heterogeneity is not
captured by simple IFs, which is why an individual article’ s quality cannot be
reliably (i.e. without considerable probability of misattribution) derived from
the journal’ s IF . W ang et al. (2016) even show that “novel” papers (deﬁned as
those which contain new and often unprecedented combinations of citations),
which are more likely – at a greater overall variance in citation counts – to be
major contributions to science in the long run, are often published in jour-
nals with a relatively low IF . Quite generally , Palacios-Huerta and V olij (2004)
therefore point out that rankings based on IFs do not build on a sound theo-
retical basis and are just one among many other conceivable ways of ranking
journals’ (or authors’) intellectual inﬂuence.
Given the discussion about the adequacy of IFs, alternative, more reﬁned
measures have been suggested recently . For example, Guerrero-Bote and
Moya-Aneg´on (2012) propose the SJR2 indicator, which works similar to
Google’ s PageRank algorithm. Instead of only considering simple citation
numbers, these are weighted by the prestige of the citing journal (i.e. that
journal’ s own SJR2) as well as the proximity (i.e. similarity in citation proﬁles)
of the cited and citing journal (see Guerrero-Bote and Moya-Aneg ´on 2012).
The SJR2 is highly correlated with simple IFs, but documents different rank-
ings between journals. For the empirical analysis in the present book, the SJR2
index is used as one reference to identify premier journals in economics (see
Subsection 2.4.1).
The second prominent simple index number, the h-index, was originally
proposed by Hirsch (2005). It is usually calculated for individual authors and
used as a proxy to compare their scientiﬁc productivity . When ordering all of an
author’ s works by number of citations, the present h-index is equal to the num-
ber x of items of that author which have been cited at least x times. This results
in a single number which may be considered as a better measure of a scholar’ s
scientiﬁc productivity than the mere number of papers (which does not capture
quality) or the total number of citations (which may be highly skewed by one
single very successful contribution). It is thus, to some extent, a measure of both
quality and quantity combined. While the h-index is most prominent, there
are similar examples of the same family of indexes which are sometimes used as
well: Egghe (2006) proposed the g-index, where g is the unique largest number
so that an author’ sg most cited publications are cited at least g
2 times in total. By
giving higher weight to very frequently cited articles, g is usually larger than h.
Like the IF , the h-index and similar numbers are subject to a series of issues,
too, for which they are frequently criticized. While between two authors, the
one with the higher h-index will have a higher number of relatively frequently
cited publications, the other may actually have more very highly cited pub-
lications. Problems like these are especially relevant when comparing authors
across (sub)disciplines. This holds in addition to the fact that the h-index

--- PAGE 23 ---
10 Method and data
does not account for these differences in citation behaviour in the ﬁrst place.
Normalizing citation counts by each (sub)discipline’ s average citation count
can then lead to rank reversals among authors. Perry and Reny (2016: 2723)
thus criticize popular scientometric indicators like the h-index for being “ad
hoc measures based almost entirely on intuition and rules of thumb” and
instead propose a new “Euclidean” index to measure research performance
by taking the square root over the sum of the squares of citations of each of an
author’ s papers. This index, Perry and Reny (2016) argue, can overcome several
shortcomings (e.g. ranking reversals) of the h-index and related concepts.
2.1.2 The place of bibliometrics in history of economic
thought research
Given the aim of scientometrics and bibliometrics to quantitatively describe
science itself with scientiﬁc methods, it appears to be a relevant approach to and
tool for the history of science – including, of course, the HET . However, the
use of bibliometric methods in research on the HET has been rather limited so
far, as a cursory reading of the ﬁeld’ s most prominent journals – even more so if
supplemented by a search for scientometrics- or bibliometrics-related key terms
within these journals – quickly indicates.
4 A look at conference programmes
of relevant meetings further conﬁrms the impression of a marginal role of bib-
liometric research. Instead, work on the HET usually analyses a small sample
of contributions in-depth, and this approach is sometimes supplemented by
archival sources or biographical and general historical records. As an anecdotal
but illustrative example of this, consider Marcuzzo’ s (2008) paper, which iden-
tiﬁes four broad categories of methods used in research on the HET: “textual
exegesis”, “rational reconstruction”, “contextual analysis” and “historical nar-
rative”. Interestingly , although Marcuzzo (2008) uses some descriptive biblio-
metrics to describe the subject of the HET herself, she does not list quantitative
or bibliometric research among the categories of approaches she identiﬁes.
However, there are nonetheless a number of interesting and often highly illu-
minating contributions which provide new and additional insights on various
questions discussed in the literature dealing with economics and the HET –
particularly , related to the availability of respective data, more recent HET . The
following list is not comprehensive, but it should still provide a good impression
of the different contexts and questions where bibliometric and scientometric
methods are employed in the HET , which should also highlight the value of
such approaches.
Already ﬁve decades ago, George Stigler (1965a), maybe “the most famous
advocate of scientometrics in econom ics” (Diamond 2000: 323), had pointed
out the potential of quantitative methods in his Essays in the History of Eco-
nomics and provided a categorized list of the contents of ﬁve relevant journals
(see especially Stigler 1965b). Stigler and Freidland (1975, 1979) subsequently
published further work which empirically approached HET topics using
citation measures acquired through manually counting references in published

--- PAGE 24 ---
Method and data 11
articles (see Hamermesh 2015: 3). The ﬁrst dedicated HET journal to publish
on the topic was probably History of Political Economy (HOPE)w i t hS t i g l e r
and Freidland’ s (1979) “T he Pattern of Citation Pr actices in Economics”.
Bordo and Landau (1979) provided their “Exploration T owards a Quantita-
tive History of Thought ” using 1945–1968 citation data in the next HOPE
issue. Subsequently and ever since, bibliometrics featured more frequently in
HOPE than in other primary HET journals – see e.g. Oehler (1990), Biddle
(1996), Sandelin and V eiderpass (1996) , Backhouse (1998) an d very recently
Claveau and Gingras (2016).
A year after Stigler (1965a), Bronfenbrenner (1966) documented “T rends,
Cycles, and Fads in Economic Writing”, which were illustrated with two
tables and two ﬁgures. Bronfenbre nner (1966) used the American Economic
Association’ s (AEA) “Index of Economic Journals” to categorize papers (sim-
ilar to today’ s JEL codes) from 1866–1963 as well as dissertation records from
1960–1965 documented in the American Economic Review in order to identify
trends and cycles of interest in different subdisciplines of economics, specif-
ically in what was considered orthodoxy or the mainstream. Of particular
interest for the research question and analysis in the present book is that Bron-
fenbrenner (1966: 546) points out that the discussion of economic ﬂuctuations
greatly increased throughout the Great Depression – but he classiﬁes this obser-
vation as a fad, and does not argue for a recurring theme of generally increased
discussion of the matter during economic downturns. Despite the use of the
term “cycle”, therefore, Bronfenbrenner’ s (1966) analysis was not limited to
BCCT , and the length of the cycles in the literature which he observes is far
greater than the ﬁve to maybe ten years business cycles are usually associated
with, too (see e.g. Bronfenbrenner 1966: 542).
A somewhat comparable analysis which speciﬁcally refers to both Stigler
(1965b) and Bronfenbrenner (1966) was provided by Diamond and Haurin
(1995), who document changes of the popularity of different economics subdis-
ciplines by coding and tracing research interests of AEA members as registered
in the AEA directories at different points in time between 1905 and 1989. Most
notably , Diamond and Haurin (1995: 118) ﬁnd an increase in theory between
1956 and 1969, followed by a subsequent decline. They also ﬁnd that inter-
est in HET had decreased since 1955 and throughout 1969–1974, but slightly
increased at very low levels again afterwards.
Just like in scientometrics in general, the digital availability of data sources
allows for more applications and more comprehensive analyses in HET research.
Extensively using Social Science Citation Index (SSCI, see Subsection 2.3.3)
data, Kim et al. (2006) identify the mos t cited papers in economics since 1970
and document their characteristics, background, etc. Similar data are used by
Laibson and Zeckhauser ( 1998) to point out the relevance of some inﬂuential
behavioural economics research. A more detailed analysis of behavioural eco-
nomics since Herbert Simon in the 1950s, based on SSCI and JSTOR (see
Subsection 2.3.2) data, is provided by Geiger (2017). Wight (2002) uses SSCI
data to trace citations to Adam Smith’ s work between 1970 and 1997. In other

--- PAGE 25 ---
12 Method and data
contributions, Hoover (2004) uses JSTOR data to trace the frequency of papers
using terms such as “cause” or “causal ity” in economics jour nals since 1930, an
approach very similar to what is employed in this book (see Section 2.4). Silva
and T eixeira (2008) provide a bibliometric overview of the economics literature
on structural change since the 1970s. D iamond (2009) co mpares the inﬂu-
ence of Keynes and Schumpeter over time, using SSCI data. Similarly , Becker
and Knudsen (2004) had already examined occurrences of the name “Schum-
peter” in top economics journals between 1898 and 1998. Based on SSCI
citation counts, Jovanovic (2012) tracks the rec eption of Louis Bachelier’ s work
on ﬁnancial economics. Using JSTOR da ta, King et al. (2012) docume nt the
increase of mathematization (and concepts closely linked to it, such as statistics
or the use of the term “model”) in economics throughout the 20th century
and until 2012, speciﬁcally for the years following W orld W ar I until the 1980s.
Hoover (2014) traces citations to T rygve Haavelmo’ s work since the 1940s
using JSTOR data. Emphasizing and analysing somewhat different variables,
Sandelin and Ranki (1997) document ch anges in Swedish economics between
the 1940s and early 1990s by observing shifts in the languages of cited articles
(and also the countries where cited authors work), as well as of Ph.D . theses,
etc. (see also similarly Sandelin 2001). Biddle and Hamermesh (2016) analyse
the history of microeconomics after W orld W ar II, with a focus on the role of
theory , by outlining and quantitatively testing earlier arguments brought for-
ward in the HET literature. Concerning the very recent history of economics,
Cardoso et al. (2010) use EconLit and SSCI data to investigate which regions of
the world had contributed how much to inﬂuential economics research since
1991. Duarte and Giraud (2016) provide bibliometric time series from 1991 to
2011 to assess the place of HET itself within mainstream economics.
Furthermore, even when it is not the main part of the HET analysis which is
presented, scientometric and bibliometric data and methods are sometimes still
present in respective contributions in order to provide an additional illustration
of the main arguments. For example, Colander (2004) supplements his paper on
“The Strange Persistence of the IS-LM Model” with term frequency data from
JSTOR and EconLit. More comprehensively , Qin’ s (2011) work on the history
of econometric approaches to the Phillips curve discussion is supplemented
with citation data. Therefore, it is clear that scientometric and bibliometric data
and tools have a wide applicability in research on the HET .
Outside of what may strictly be considered the HET (even if only for how
recent a time period the study deals with), scientometrics and bibliometrics
sometimes feature in other research on economics, too. Indeed, it may even
be argued that economics and scientometrics are complementary , because, for
example, scientometrics can provide information relevant to allocating scarce
resources, e.g. concerning research funds, and economics can provide the-
oretical explanations for scientometric ﬁndings, e.g. concerning researcher
behaviour (see Diamond 2000). A few examples will sufﬁce to illustrate this.
In an early application using citation data in economics, Gerrity and
McKenzie (1978) ranked ec onomics departments in the South of the United

--- PAGE 26 ---
Method and data 13
States. In a very economic bibliometric analysis of economics, Hamermesh
et al. (1982) investigate the relation between economic rewards received by
economists and bibliometric variables such as their citations. Similarly ,
Diamond (1986) estimates a “dollar value” of citations by comparing differ-
ent researchers’ salaries and earnings. Peritz (1990) compares citation records of
funded with those of unfunded economics research, and ﬁnds that the former
is cited more frequently . Beckmann and Persson (1998) identify the 13 most
cited journals in economics. Using ec onomics as an example, Cahlik (2000) dis-
cusses which methods are suitable to identify a discipline’ s fundamental articles
(also see Subsection 2.4.1). Oswald (2009) deals with the question of assess-
ing a country’ s research output by analysing bibliometric data on economics.
Diamond and T oth (2007) employ a logit estimation to identify determinants
such as citation counts and where a Ph.D . was obtained to explain which
AEA members were elected presidents in the 1950s. Hamermesh (2013) doc-
uments changes in co-authorship, authors’ age structure and methodology in
top economics journals between 1950 and 2010. Sun and Xia (2016) anal-
yse how citations of cited papers, authors’ IFs and similar measures relate to
a paper’ s citation count in economics. Gnewuch and W ohlrabe (2017) analyse
the connection between characteristics of titles of economics papers and cita-
tion counts. Brogaard et al. (2018) analyse cit ation counts of economists before
and after they were granted tenure. V ery generally , Hamermesh (2015) provides
an overview both of (early) uses of citation data in economics, as well as some
general guidelines for their use.
Among all previously published bibliometric works on economics, the most
relevant one for the analysis in this book is that by Daniele Besomi (2011).
Building on an identiﬁcation of key terms relevant to BCCT which is presented
in the early part of that paper, Besomi (2011: 113–117) proceeds to document
absolute annual frequencies of these terms within the titles of a wide array of
contributions (journal articles, books and even pamphlets, etc.) listed primar-
ily on JSTOR and EconLit and dating back to 1815. In discussing the results,
Besomi (2011: 55ff.) ﬁnds that the frequency of key terms related to business
cycles and crises indeed increases in connection with economic contractions.
An extension of Besomi’ s (2011) work has subsequently been suggested by
Kufenko and Geiger (2016). The analysis which follows in this book fur-
ther expands on Kufenko and Geiger (2016), as the following sections will
demonstrate.
2.1.3 Operationalising the bibliometrics of business cycles
and economic crises
Ideally , to fully answer the research question derived from the PPT hypothesis –
or any question which concerns general developments in the HET – one might
want to read all economics papers carefully and, through a profound under-
standing of business cycle theory and related literature, classify and categorize
these items correspondingly . Owing to the vast amount of both historical and

--- PAGE 27 ---
14 Method and data
contemporary literature, this is, of course, impossible. Indeed, there exists a
major trade-off: the broader the trend which one wants to analyse, the less fea-
sible it is to conduct a full in-depth analysis of all its constituent parts. This is
precisely where bibliometric analysis enters the picture as a very helpful tool:
it allows an analysis of a broad spectrum of hundreds of thousands of articles
by standardized methods and metrics – at the expense of the detail and the
researcher’ s individual insight with which the single elements can be analysed. It
is straightforward to see, therefore, that the application of bibliometric methods
in the HET is not a substitute for, but a complementary approach to, those tra-
ditionally employed in the ﬁeld such as the careful in-depth reading of selected
texts. Indeed, as Merton (1979: vii) put it in his foreword to Garﬁeld (1979),
“[s]pecialized historical and sociological studies can supplement explicit cita-
tions with tacit ones, the kind that can be reconstructed from textual evidence
such as eponymous allusions, terminology bearing the stamp of the source of
an idea, and the like. ”
The utility of this, as it were, co-operation between bibliometrics and more
“traditional” HET approaches becomes apparent in the discussion of how
to actually operationalize the PPT hypothesis and our research question of
whether and how the economics literature on business cycles and economic
crises is connected to economic ﬂuctuations. Here, it is evident that appropri-
ate bibliometric variables can hardly be identiﬁed without a prior theoretical
understanding of the literature to be analysed. Thus, if the history of BCCT and
related work is to be traced with bibliometric data, as is the aim of this book,
it should be clearly deﬁned when and how a paper is classiﬁed as belonging
to that very category , which presupposes a theoretical background and knowl-
edge of the relevant literature. Building on this, then, both the number of such
papers as well as references and citations to these can be counted, analysed and
discussed.
There are multiple ways to classify a particular paper as belonging to a cer-
tain category such as BCCT . The arguably most precise one is based on an
in-depth reading of the said article – i.e. the standard approach in most HET
work. However, as pointed out above, this is in no way feasible for a biblio-
metric analysis of the scope employed in this book. Therefore, more superﬁcial
approaches are necessary , which will be presented in Section 2.4. The primary
tool employed is to identify and classify contributions by the terms they use. In
doing so, we refer to and build on Besomi’ s (2011) list of key terms related to
BCCT . The respective bibliometric data used here are presented in Section 2.3.
On the other hand, answering the research question also requires an empiri-
cal assessment of economic ﬂuctuations, of course: the data used for this other
half of our approach are presented in Section 2.2. Next to describing how the
relevant bibliometric series are constructed, Section 2.4 also lays out the differ-
ent statistical methods employed in comparing the economic and bibliometric
data. The descriptive and econometric analyses return a long list of quantitative
empirical results documented in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. In the ﬁnal step of the
analysis, the results are validated and discussed in Section 3.3. Here, BCCT , as

--- PAGE 28 ---
Method and data 15
theoryimplemen-
tation
connection, correlation and
potential causality between
theory and actual events
research question historical
economic
development
bibliometric
data
(Section 2.3)
US economic
data
(Section 2.2)
overview of the empirical
strategy and the methods
employed (Section 2.4)
empirical strategy
presentation of descriptive and
econometric results
(Chapter 3)
empirical results
discussion
empirical analysis
operationalization
operationalization
“panics produce texts”
(PPT)
economic literature on
business cycles and 
economic crises
Figure 2.1 Schematic overview of the research question and its implementation.
well as previous HET research on the issue, will feature prominently once more,
for it is this theoretical background which allows one to meaningfully relate the
empirical results to the research question and therefore to ultimately conclude
the book in Chapter 4. Figure 2.1 summarizes this approach, starting from the
PPT hypothesis, and including the various steps which are documented in
detail in all of the following.
2.2 Economic data: measuring business cycles
In order to assess the effect of business cycles and economic crises on the eco-
nomics literature, it is of course inevitable to ﬁrst operationalize and quantify
said business cycles and economic crises in the economic data. In both theo-
retical and empirical literature on such ﬂuctuations, there are multiple variables
which feature frequently and in prominent position, irrespective of whether
business cycles and economic crises are to be traced in the data, explained by
reference to the data or a theoretical construct which can then be approximated
with these data, or even if attempts at prediction are made. Correspond-
ing with the literature, we thus consider seven economic variables to trace
business cycles and economic crises in the data, and additionally employ an
index based on an assessment of various indicators to trace contraction peri-
ods: income per capita, unemployment rates, industrial production, investment
activity , bankruptcy rates, the consumer price index, the Standard & Poor’ s
stock market index, and a dummy variable for contraction years (i.e. down-
swings). Each of these variables, their relevance for the analysis at hand, sources,
availability and additional remarks (where necessary) are laid out in detail in the

--- PAGE 29 ---
16 Method and data
Ta b l e 2 . 1Reference list of economic variables
ID Name V ariable Period Source
A INCPC income per capita 1929–2016 FRED; US BEA (2017a)
B UNEMP unemployment rate 1948–2016 FRED; US BLS (2017)
C INDP industrial production 1919–2016 FRED; Fed BoG (2017)
D INV investment 1929–2016 FRED; US BEA (2017b)
E BANKR bankruptcies 1900–2005 Garrett (2007)
F CPI consumer prices 1774–2016 Ofﬁcer and Williamson (2017)
G SPC stock market index 1871–2016 Shiller (2015)
H CON contraction years 1855–2015 NBER
Note: For each variable, the different columns indicate their assigned IDs, their short name identiﬁer,
the variable, the time period for which data are available, and the respective source.
following Subsections 2.2.1–2.2.8. T able 2.1 summarizes their main metadata
and provides variable IDs and names for future reference.
The question of operationalizing business cycles and economic crises has
two more layers in addition to selecting appropriate variables, though. The
ﬁrst one concerns the time period and is rather easy to settle: the longer the
available series, i.e. the larger the sample size, the better. Therefore, as long as
a time series is available without any relevant structural breaks in the data, we
use the maximum available length. As the respective subsections show , how-
ever, this leads to considerable differences in the years covered by the various
series. In general, it would also be desirable to have all data at as high a fre-
quency as possible. However, here the bibliometric variables (see the following
Section 2.3) become a limiting factor, for they are mostly available consistently
only on an annual basis. Therefore, we will also use annual frequencies for the
economic data in our analysis.
The second additional point to consider and discuss is somewhat harder to
tackle. It concerns the question of the appropriate geographical entity to trace.
For the analysis in this book, we use US data as our proxy for economic activ-
ity – as previously done in Kufenko and Geiger (2016). This does, of course,
introduce some inaccuracy with regards to our research question, because
economists surely do not only know about ﬂuctuations in the United States,
but also about those in other countries. Ideally , we would like to include
global or at least aggregate OECD data, while also striving to differentiate
country-speciﬁc business cycles.
Nonetheless, using US data seems like a good compromise between data
availability and a large and especially re levant (particularly in terms of the lit-
erature) economy for multiple reasons. The ﬁrst is the high availability of the
data, and the length of the available time series, sometimes reaching back into
the 19th century without any problematic structural breaks in the data (espe-
cially when compared with, for example, OECD or even global aggregates).

--- PAGE 30 ---
Method and data 17
Secondly , the United States is the major and leading economy of the world,
and has been for over a century . By considering US data, we can therefore trace
economic activity in the world’ s largest economy for much of the time period
for which a large sample of bibliometric data is available – especially when the
papers constituting our bibliometric data are mostly in English (see Section 2.3).
Furthermore, and in connection with this, US developments have also been a
central concern in much research on business cycles and economic crises, not
least because of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and the
research conducted and originating there. More broadly , close to half of all
journal articles on the EconLit database (see Subsection 2.3.1) which contain
either of the strings “business cycle” or “trade cycle” (a term which was mostly
used in British literature until the ﬁrst half of the 20th century , as for example
in Keynes (1936) or Hicks (1950)) also contain “United States”, and the ratio is
similarly high for the term “recession”. In the economics journals on JSTOR
(see Subsection 2.3.2), among the articles which contain “business cycle” or
“trade cycle”, respectively , “recession”, the relative frequency of those featur-
ing “United States” is even higher than 50%. This indicates that the United
States is a frequent point of reference for discussions of business cycles. And,
ﬁnally , many of the most inﬂuential journals (as can be taken from, for exam-
ple, the SJR2 journal ranking – see Subsection 2.4.1) are from or are published
in the United States.
The main purpose of the economic variables illustrated in the following is
to provide an overall measure of economic activity subject to business cycles
and economic crises. If anything, it is these variables which should be among
the primary suspects expected to have an effect according to PPT on the eco-
nomics literature. Furthermore, it will also be interesting to identify potential
differences in how a particular variable is connected to developments in the
literature, e.g. if changes in one economic variable lead to more substantial
changes in one or another bibliometric variable. All series were last updated
from their online sources on March 4th and 5th, 2017.
2.2.1 Income per capita
The ﬁrst economic variable included in our analysis is a general measure of
aggregate macroeconomic activity: real disposable income per capita. Data are
taken from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Database (FRED),
speciﬁcally the Real Disposable Personal Income: Per Capita series which cov-
ers the years 1929–2016.
5 A major advantage of this particular variable is its
comparatively long historical record. The alternative series of gross domes-
tic product (per capita), which is often used as a similar indicator, only dates
back to 1947. The data supplied by FRED are originally from the US Bureau
of Economic Analysis (2017a ). W e use the standard annual series (due to the
bibliometric data being available at an annual frequency) which is given in 2009
dollars and not seasonally adjusted.

--- PAGE 40 (SAMPLE) ---
Method and data 27
JSTOR therefore serves as the primary data source for the content analysis in
the present book.
The most straightforward way to use the DfR search is to enter a search
term, then narrow the results down by selecting categories on the left of the
interface. The default option for searches is “anywhere in document”, which
means that the whole body of text, including authors, titles, abstracts and key-
words (where available), references and the main text itself are searched – i.e.
a full-text search. However, searches can also be limited to these categories:
authors, titles, abstracts, keywords and references. An author’ s name, for exam-
ple, can of course be searched for both within author names only , and anywhere
in the document. In the latter case, mentions of the name in any part of
the document – particularly the references, e.g. if the item cites an author
by that name – would also return the item as a search result. Searches are case-
insensitive and can be conducted for single terms, or longer strings consisting
of multiple words, with the strings indicated by double quotes (“ ”). Multiple
terms or strings can further be connected via “AND”, “ +”, “OR” (which is
applied as the default conjunction operator), “NOT” and “ −” Boolean opera-
tors. Search strings can also contain single or multiple character wildcards (“?”
and “∗”, respectively), except as the ﬁrst character. By searching references, it
is theoretically possible to identify citation links and thus count references to
individual papers (by using those papers’ authors, titles and journals as search
strings). However, this is generally not feasible for larger samples of cited papers
due to different citation styles, the risk of false attributions, etc., especially in
light of the fact that there are citation databases which provide exactly that
information in a systematic manner (see the next two subsections).
Results for a given search string can be further narrowed down by a wide
set of different categories (called “facets” on the DfR search help). First, the
year of publication can be selected – either one single year, or a continuous
period. Secondly , search results may be ﬁltered by their type and related fea-
tures: the “Content T ype” facet distinguishes between journals and pamphlets,
and the “Article T ype” facet then can be further used to narrow down results
to “research articles” and “book reviews” (which together constitute the large
majority of nearly 88% of items in journals), as well as “miscellaneous” (which
contains list of abstracts and everything else not covered by the other cate-
gories), “news” and “editorials”. Among book reviews, it is also possible to
further reﬁne the sample by “Reviewed Author” and “Reviewed W ork”, i.e.
by author and work that is being reviewed. Similar to a range for the years of
publications, a range for the “Page Count” of the sampled items can be selected.
The more important facets for the purpose of the present study , however,
are those that reﬁne the sample by “Subject” or “Subject Group”, respectively
“Discipline” or “Discipline Group”. JSTOR lists an “Economics” (E) category
that is part of a larger group category , “Business and Economics” (BE), which
additionally includes the neighbouring ﬁelds of “Business”, “Development
Studies”, “Finance” (F), “Labor & Employment Relations”, “Management &
Organizational Behavior” and “Marketing & Advertising”. In general, it should

--- PAGE 80 (SAMPLE) ---
Empirical results 67
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
dBE
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
sE
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
sBE
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
sF
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0%
8%
16%
24%
32%
40%
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
dE
0%
8%
16%
24%
32%
40%
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
dF
0%
8%
16%
24%
32%
40%
BCTC crisis recessiondepression
Figure 3.3 Relative frequencies of central terms, 1855–2012.
Note: Each panel shows the respective timelines for relative frequencies of the four central terms when
searching anywhere in documents, all six JSTOR categories. Left column: subject categories. Right
column: discipline categories.
course of the 20th century . Therefore, both absolute and relative frequencies
of occurrences of individual terms (which naturally do not feature in every
single item) are more volatile earlier in the observation period. This especially
holds with respect to frequencies within titles, which is why the corresponding
JSTOR series in Figures 3.4–3.8 have been smoothed by ﬁve-year moving

--- PAGE 120 (SAMPLE) ---
Empirical results 107
page 57 shows that, on the one hand, contraction years are much more frequent
before than after W orld W ar II (of the 64 contraction years in 1855–2012, 49 are
in 1855–1945). On the other hand, the total number of papers is much higher
in more recent years than it was a century ago. Therefore, forming aggregates
across all years from both earlier and later in the observation period heavily
skews the results, with contraction years being more seldom after W orld W ar II,
but potentially still having a larger weight due to the greater number of items.
What is more, aggregates are further skewed by the prevalence of trends in
the time series of relative term frequencies, as was evident from Figure 3.3 on
page 67. Quite clearly , the time series for BCTC and ‘crisis’ in particular are
characterized by distinct upward trends. Relative frequencies are thus much
higher during the decades after W orld W ar II which have been characterized
by less frequent and shorter recessions. Therefore, the descriptive results based
on averages are biased towards indicating a negative relation between contrac-
tion years and term frequencies. Since average frequencies were higher in the
second half of the observation period, but those years also coincided with less
contractions, the average annual frequencies in non-contraction years relative
to contraction years over the whole 1855–2012 period are quite likely overesti-
mated by simply taking a number out of T ables 3.2 and 3.3. While it primarily
affects the annual average, such a trend also skews the total weighted aver-
age, especially if the distribution of the different types of years (contraction or
non-contraction) is uneven in different periods of time (e.g. before or after
W orld W ar II): in that case, many contraction years with relatively low (abso-
lute) numbers (from before W orld W ar II) enter the total weighted average for
contraction years, whereas the average for non-contraction years is to a larger
extent affected by a big number of non-contraction years from the post-war
years. A similar logic may be employed to partly explain why some terms, espe-
cially ‘distress’, ‘embarrassment’ and ‘glut’, did display a frequencies pattern in
line with what PPT implies: for those three, relative frequencies were generally
higher before than after W orld W ar II, i.e. they were higher when contraction
years were more frequent. This contributes to the large differences between
non-contraction and contraction years that are observed for these terms’ annual
averages in sE in particular (e.g. see Figure 3.2 on page 65).
It deserves to be noted that these observations (term frequencies being
higher, on average, outside of than during contractions for most terms) are not
a peculiar result of the contraction year speciﬁcation from Subsection 2.2.8,
namely deﬁning contraction years as those where at least four consecutive
months were part of a downswing. T o test the robustness of the ﬁndings, we also
calculated the same averages for all 15 terms in sE and dE based on contrac-
tion year deﬁnitions where either three or six consecutive downswing months
were required.
7 Based on four months, there were 64 (49 for 1855–1945,
15 for 1946–2012) contraction and 94 ( 42/52) non-contraction years. With
three months as the criterion, this changes to 72 (55/17) contraction and 86
(36/50) non-contraction years; and there are 55 (43/12) contraction and 103
(48/55) non-contraction years if the deﬁnition is based on six months. In